
Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 25618-h.htm or 25618-h.zip:
      (https://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/5/6/1/25618/25618-h/25618-h.htm)
      or
      (https://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/5/6/1/25618/25618-h.zip)


Transcriber's note:

      Obvious printer's errors have been corrected. All other
      inconsistencies are as in the original. The author's spelling
      has been maintained.





THE SECOND BATTALION ROYAL DUBLIN FUSILIERS IN THE SOUTH AFRICAN WAR

With a Description of the Operations in the Aden Hinterland

by

MAJORS C. F. ROMER & A. E. MAINWARING







[Illustration: _W. & D. Downey._

H.R.H. The Duke of Connaught and Strathearn, K.G.,
Commander-in-Chief of The Mediterranean Forces, and Colonel-in-Chief
of The Royal Dublin Fusiliers.]



[Illustration: E Libris, The Royal Dublin Fusiliers.]


London: A. L. Humphreys, 187 Piccadilly, W.
1908




PREFACE


The 2nd Battalion Royal Dublin Fusiliers is one of the oldest
regiments in the service. It was raised in February and March, 1661,
to form the garrison of Bombay, which had been ceded to the Crown as
part of the dowry of the Infanta of Portugal, on her marriage with
King Charles II. It then consisted of four companies, the
establishment of each being one captain, one lieutenant, one ensign,
two sergeants, three corporals, two drummers, and 100 privates, and
arrived at Bombay on September 18th, 1662, under the command of Sir
Abraham Shipman. Under various titles it took part in nearly all the
continuous fighting of which the history of India of those days is
principally composed, being generally known as the Bombay European
Regiment, until in March, 1843, it was granted the title of 1st Bombay
Fusiliers. In 1862 the regiment was transferred to the Crown, when the
word 'Royal' was added to its title, and it became known as the 103rd
Regiment, The Royal Bombay Fusiliers. In 1873 the regiment was linked
to the Royal Madras Fusiliers, whose history up to that time had been
very similar to its own. By General Order 41, of 1881, the titles of
the two regiments underwent yet another change, when they became known
by their present names, the 1st and 2nd Battalions Royal Dublin
Fusiliers.

The 2nd Battalion first left India for home service on January 2nd,
1871, when it embarked on H.M.S. _Malabar_, arriving at Portsmouth
Harbour about 8 a.m. on February 4th, and was stationed at Parkhurst.
Its home service lasted until 1884, when it embarked for Gibraltar. In
1885 it moved to Egypt, and in 1886 to India, where it was quartered
until 1897, when it was suddenly ordered to South Africa, on account
of our strained relations with the Transvaal Republic. On arrival at
Durban, however, the difficulties had been settled for the time being,
and the regiment was quartered at Pietermaritzburg until it moved up
to Dundee in 1899, just previous to the outbreak of war.

The late Major-General Penn-Symons assumed command of the Natal force
in 1897, and from that date commenced the firm friendship and mutual
regard between him and the regiment, which lasted without a break
until the day when he met his death at Talana. The interest he took in
the battalion and his zeal resulted in a stiff training, but a
training for which we must always feel grateful, and remember with
kind, if sad, recollections. It was his custom to see a great deal of
the regiments under his command, and he very frequently lunched with
us, by which means he not only made himself personally acquainted with
the characters of the officers of the regiment, but also had an
opportunity of seeing for himself the deep _esprit de corps_ which
existed in it, and without which no regiment can ever hope to
successfully overcome the perils and hardships incidental to active
service.

As the shadow of the coming war grew dark and ever darker on the
Northern horizon, the disposition of the Natal troops underwent some
change, and General Penn-Symons' brigade, of which the regiment formed
part, was moved up to Dundee, and was there stationed at the time of
the outbreak of hostilities. In spite of the long roll of battle
honours, of which both battalions are so justly proud, the South
African Campaign was the first active service either had seen under
their present titles, and the first opportunity afforded them of
making those new titles as celebrated as the old ones which had done
so much towards the acquisition of our Indian Empire. Imbued with
these feelings the regiment lay camped within full view of Talana
Hill, waiting the oncoming of the huge wave of invasion which was so
shortly to sweep over the borders, engulf Ladysmith, and threaten to
reach Maritzburg itself. But that was not to be. Its force was spent
long ere it reached the capital, and a few horsemen near the banks of
the Mooi River marked the line of its utmost limit in this direction.

The present work only claims to be a plain soldier's narrative of the
part taken by the 2nd Battalion Royal Dublin Fusiliers in stemming
this rush, and its subsequent efforts, its grim fights on the hills
which fringe the borders of the River Tugela, its long and weary
marches across the rolling uplands of the Transvaal, and its
subsequent monotonous life of constant vigil in fort and blockhouse,
and on escort duty.

All five battalions took part in the war. The 1st sailed from Ireland
on November 10th, 1899, and sent three companies under Major Hicks to
strengthen the 2nd Battalion. They arrived in time to share in the
action at Colenso on December 15th, and all the subsequent fighting
which finally resulted in the relief of Ladysmith, after which they
returned to the headquarters of the 1st Battalion, which formed part
of the Natal army under General Sir Redvers Buller, and later on
advanced through Laing's Nek and Alleman's Nek into the Transvaal. The
3rd Battalion sent a very strong draft of its reserve, and the 4th and
5th Battalions volunteered and came out to the front, where they
rendered most excellent service. In addition to the battalions there
were a good many officers of one or other battalion employed in
various ways in the huge theatre of operations. Major Godley and Major
Pilson had been selected for special service before the war, and the
former served in Mafeking during the siege, while the latter served
under General Plumer in his endeavours to raise it. Captain Kinsman
also served with the latter force. Major Rutherford, Adjutant of the
Ceylon Volunteers, arrived in command of the contingent from that
corps. Lieutenants Cory and Taylor served with the Mounted Infantry
most of the time, as did Lieutenants Garvice, Grimshaw, and Frankland,
after the capture of Pretoria, while Captain Carington Smith's share
in the war is briefly stated later on. Captain MacBean was on the
staff until he was killed at Nooitgedacht. The M.I. of the regiment
served with great distinction, and it is regretted that it is
impossible to include an account of the many actions and marches in
which they took part, but the present volume deals almost exclusively
with the battalion as a battalion.

The authors are desirous of expressing their most hearty and cordial
thanks to all those who have assisted them in the preparation of this
volume. They are especially indebted to Colonel H. Tempest Hicks,
C.B., without whose co-operation the work could not have been carried
out, for the loan of his diary, and for the sketches and many of the
photographs. To Colonel F. P. English, D.S.O., for the extracts from
his diary containing an account of the operations in the Aden
Hinterland and photographs. To Captain L. F. Renny for his Ladysmith
notes. Also to Sergeant-Major C. V. Brumby, Quartermaster-Sergeant
Purcell, and Mr. French (late Quartermaster-Sergeant), for assistance
in collecting data, compiling the appendix, and for photographs,
respectively.

                                        C. F. ROMER.

                                        A. E. MAINWARING.




CONTENTS


PART I.--FIGHTING.

  CHAP.                                                           Page

     I. Talana                                                       3

    II. The Retreat from Dundee                                     16

   III. From Colenso to Estcourt                                    22

    IV. Estcourt and Frere                                          28

     V. The Battle of Colenso                                       34

    VI. Venter's Spruit                                             42

   VII. Vaal Krantz                                                 55

  VIII. Hart's and Pieter's Hills--The Relief of Ladysmith          61

    IX. The Siege of Ladysmith                                      76

     X. Aliwal North and Fourteen Streams                           83


PART II.--TREKKING.

     I. From Vryburg to Heidelberg                                  97

    II. Heidelberg                                                 111

   III. After De Wet                                               121

    IV. September in the Gatsrand                                  141

     V. Frederickstadt--Klip River--The Losberg                    164

    VI. Buried Treasure--The Eastern Transvaal--The
          Krugersdorp Defences                                     182

   VII. The Last Twelve Months                                     193


PART III.

     I. The Aden Hinterland                                        205

    II. The Return Home and Reception                              217

   III. The Memorial Arch                                          229


APPENDIX                                                           239




ILLUSTRATIONS


FULL-PAGE PLATES.

  H.R.H. The Duke of Connaught and Strathearn,
    K.G., Commander-in-chief of the
    Mediterranean Forces, and Colonel-in-chief
    of the Royal Dublin Fusiliers                       _Frontispiece_

  Regimental Book-Plate                                   _Title-page_

  Casualties at Talana                                 _Facing page_ 8

  Major-General C. D. Cooper, C.B., commanding
    2nd Royal Dublin Fusiliers in Natal                "     "      24

  Captain C. F. Romer and Captain E. Fetherstonhaugh   "     "      32

  General Hart's Flank Attack from the
    Boers' Point of View (Plan)                        "     "      34

  Casualties at Colenso                                "     "      36

  Group of twenty Sergeants taken after the
    Battle of Colenso, all that remained
    of Forty-Eight who left Maritzburg                 "     "      40

  Casualties at Tugela Heights                         "     "  56, 64

  Taking Fourteen Streams (Plan)                       "     "      88

  Miscellaneous Casualties                             "     "     104

  Colonel H. Tempest Hicks, C.B., commanding
    2nd Royal Dublin Fusiliers, March, 1900--March,
    1904                                             _facing Page_ 112

  Plan of Position at Zuikerbosch                     "     "      120

  Plan of Battle of Frederickstadt                    "     "      168

  Sketch Plan of Kilmarnock House and Fortifications  "     "      184

  Krugersdorp from Kilmarnock House                   "     "      200

  Officers of the 2nd Battalion Royal Dublin
    Fusiliers who embarked for Aden                   "     "      216

  The Memorial Arch, Dublin                           "     "      232

  The South African Memorial, Natal                   "     "      238


ILLUSTRATIONS IN TEXT.

  The Last Rites                                                    10

  Armourer-Sergeant Waite--'Delenda Est Carthago'                   18

  Railway Bridge at Colenso                                         23

  Boer Trenches, Colenso                                            36

  Bringing down the Wounded                                         41

  After the Fight                                                   65

  The Grave of Colonel Sitwell and Captain Maitland,
    Gordon Highlanders (attached), near Railway
    at Pieter's Hill                                                67

  Pieter's Hill, Feb. 27th, 1900                                    69

  Pontoon Bridge, River Tugela, Feb. 28th, 1900                     70

  2nd Royal, Dublin Fusiliers, heading Relief Troops,
    marching into Ladysmith, March, 1900,                           72

  General Sir Redvers Buller, V.C., entering Ladysmith              73

  The Dublins are coming--Ladysmith                                 74

  Sir George White watching Relief Force entering
    Ladysmith                                                       75

  Sergeant Davis in Meditation over 'Long Cecil' at
    Kimberley. 'Shall I Take it for the Officers?'                  83

  St. Patrick's Day in Camp. Private Monaghan, the
    Regimental Butcher, in Foreground                               84

  A Wash in hot Water--Aliwal North                                 87

  The Regimental Maxim in Action at Fourteen
    Streams                                                         89

  Captain Jervis, General Fitzroy Hart, C.B., C.M.G.,
    and Captain Arthur Hart                                         91

  Issuing Queen Victoria's Chocolate. Colour-Sergeant
    Connell, 'G' Company, on left                                   93

  First Entry into Krugersdorp. Captain and Adjutant
    Fetherstonhaugh in Foreground                                   99

  'Speed, Dead Slow'                                               104

  Hoisting the Union Jack at Krugersdorp                           106

  Johan Meyer's House, five Miles outside Johannesburg             107

  Sergeant Davis, evidently with all we wanted                     108

  Paardekraal Monument, Krugersdorp                                110

  The Officers' Mess                                               120

  Corporal Tierney and Chef Burst                                  123

  Fourth Class on the Z.a.s.m.                                     125

  Fifth Class on the Z.a.s.m.                                      127

  The Vaal River, Lindeque Drift                                   133

  The R.D.F. Bathing in Mooi River, Potchefstroom                  136

  Father Mathews                                                   142

  Funeral of Commandant Theron and a British
    Soldier, Sept. 6th, 1900                                       149

  Buffelsdoorn Camp, Gatsrand Hills                                152

  A Group of Boer Prisoners taken at the Surprise
    of Pochefstroom                                                153

  Colour-Sergeant Cossy issuing Beer                               154

  'Come to the Cook-house Door, Boys!'                             163

  Sergeant French and the Officers' Mess, Nachtmaal                170

  4·7 crossing a Drift, assisted by the Dublin Fusiliers           172

  Boy Fitzpatrick waiting at Lunch                                 178

  'The Latest Shave.' Captain G. S. Higginson (mounted)
    and Major Bird                                                 181

  The Hairdresser's Shop                                           192

  Kilmarnock, Krugersdorp                                          193

  A Blockhouse                                                     196

  The 'Blue Caps' relieving the 'Old Toughs'                       201

  Dthala Camp                                                      210

  Dthala Village, From Camp                                        211

  A Frontier Tower--Abdali Country                                 213

  Homeward bound at last, after twenty Years'
    Foreign Service                                                219




PART I.

FIGHTING.




THE 2ND BATTALION

ROYAL DUBLIN FUSILIERS




CHAPTER I.

TALANA.

  'The midnight brought the signal sound of strife,
  The morn the marshalling in arms, the day--
  Battle's magnificently stern array.'

                              _Byron._


The 2nd Battalion of the Royal Dublin Fusiliers left India for
Maritzburg, Natal, in 1897, and therefore, on the outbreak of the war
between Great Britain and the South African Republics, had the
advantage of possessing some acquaintance with the topography of the
colony, and of a two years' training and preparation for the long
struggle which was to ensue.

The political situation had become so threatening by July, 1899, that
the military authorities began to take precautionary measures, and the
battalion was ordered to effect a partial mobilisation and to collect
its transport. On September 20th it moved by train to Ladysmith,[1]
and four days later proceeded to Dundee. Here Major-General Sir W.
Penn-Symons assumed the command of a small force, consisting of 18th
Hussars, 13th, 67th, and 69th Batteries R.F.A., 1st Leicestershire
Regiment, 1st King's Royal Rifles, and 2nd Royal Dublin Fusiliers.
Each infantry battalion had a mounted infantry company. The brigade
was reinforced on October 16th by the 1st Royal Irish Fusiliers.

         [Footnote 1: It was at Ladysmith that the battalion adopted
         the green tops on the helmets, a distinguishing badge which
         was worn throughout the war. The 1st Battalion painted theirs
         blue on account of the historic nickname, 'Blue-caps,'
         acquired by them at the time of the Mutiny.]

The country was still nominally at peace, but the Dundee force held
itself ready for emergencies, and sent out mounted patrols by day and
infantry piquets by night, while the important railway junction at
Glencoe was held by a company. The General utilised this period of
waiting in carrying out field-firing and practising various forms of
attack. As he was a practical and experienced soldier, he succeeded in
bringing his command to a high state of efficiency, and the battalion
owed much to his careful preparation. It was due largely to his
teaching that the men knew how to advance from cover to cover and
displayed such ready 'initiative' in the various battles of the Natal
Campaign. The opportunity of putting into practice this teaching soon
presented itself, for on October 12th news was received that the South
African Republics had declared war on the previous day.

Consideration of the advisability of pushing forward a small force to
Dundee, and of the reasons for such a movement, does not fall within
the scope of this work; but a glance at the map will show that Sir W.
Penn-Symons had a wide front to watch, since he could be attacked from
three sides. Although precise information regarding the Boer forces
was lacking, it was known that commandoes were assembling at
Volksrust, along the left bank of the Buffalo River, and on the far
side of Van Reenan's Pass.

Early in the morning of October 13th a telegram was received from Sir
G. White, asking General Penn-Symons to send a battalion to Ladysmith
at once, as the Boers were reported to be advancing on that town. The
General paid the 2nd Royal Dublin Fusiliers the compliment of
selecting them for this duty, and they entrained accordingly, about
4.30 a.m., reaching Ladysmith some four hours later. They detrained
with the utmost haste and marched at once towards Dewdrop, whither the
Ladysmith garrison had been sent; but the report of a Boer advance was
discovered to be without foundation, and the battalion was halted five
miles outside Ladysmith, and ordered to return. It did not reach the
camp at Dundee until 11 p.m.

On the following day Sir W. Penn-Symons moved his detachment closer to
the town of Dundee, and placed his camp three or four hundred yards
north of the road to Glencoe Junction. It soon became clear that the
Boers meant to invade Natal, and Newcastle was occupied by them on the
15th, while the mounted patrols of the Dundee force were already in
touch with the commandoes on the left bank of the Buffalo. The
detached company at Glencoe was withdrawn on the 18th, and on the 19th
three companies of the regiment, under Major English, were sent to the
Navigation Colliery in order to bring away large quantities of mealie
bags stored there.

Colonel Cooper, commanding the 2nd Battalion Royal Dublin Fusiliers,
had been given an extension of his command, and was hurrying back from
a short period of leave in England, so the battalion was at this time
under the command of Major S. G. Bird.

It was now evident to every one that we were on the eve of
hostilities, and a spirit of keen excitement and anticipation ran
through all ranks. After a long tour of foreign service, during which
the regiment had not had the good fortune to see active service,
though on three occasions they had been within measurable distance of
it, they were now to have the long-wished-for chance of showing that,
in spite of altered denominations and other changes, they were
prepared to keep their gallant and historical reputation untarnished.
Our advanced patrols had already seen the first signs of the coming
torrent of invasion, and one and all were seized with that feeling,
common to all mankind, of longing to get the waiting and the
preparation over, and to commence the real business for which they had
been so carefully and so thoroughly prepared. Full of the most
implicit confidence in their brave leader, the regiment knew to a man
that they would soon be at hand-grips, and their two years' residence
in the country and knowledge of the history of the last Boer War, and
the stain to be rubbed out, made every pulse tingle with the desire to
show that the past had been but an unfortunate blunder, and that the
British soldier of the present day was no whit inferior to his
predecessors of Indian, Peninsular, Waterloo, and Crimean fame.

On the night of the 19-20th October, Lieutenant Grimshaw was sent with
a patrol of the Mounted Infantry company of the battalion to watch the
road to Vant's and Landsman's Drifts, ten miles east of Dundee. About
2 a.m. on October 20th this officer reported that a Boer commando was
advancing on the town. At a later hour he forwarded a second message
to the effect that he was retiring before superior numbers, one man of
his party having been wounded, and that the enemy were in occupation
of the hills to the east of the town. On the receipt of this message
General Penn-Symons ordered two companies of the Dublin Fusiliers to
support Lieutenant Grimshaw. 'B' and 'E' companies, under Captains
Dibley and Weldon, accordingly left camp at 4 a.m., and, moving
through the town, took up a position in Sand Spruit, which runs along
the eastern edge of Dundee. The whole brigade stood to arms, as usual,
at 5 a.m., but was dismissed at 5.15 a.m. At about 5.30 a.m. the mist
lifted, and everybody's gaze was directed on Talana Hill, where
numbers of men in black mackintoshes could be seen. The general
impression was that they were members of the town guard, but the
arrival of the first shell soon dispelled this illusion.

Soon after 5.30 a.m. the Boer artillery opened fire on the camp. Their
fire was accurate enough, considering that the range was near 5400
yards, but the damage done was practically nothing, as very few shells
burst, and these only on impact. Our own artillery (13th and 69th
Field Batteries, with 'D' company of the battalion as escort) did not
immediately respond, as they were at the time engaged in watering
their horses; but as soon as possible they were in position to the
east of the camp, and began to shell the crest of Talana Hill. They
obtained the range almost immediately, and in a short time overpowered
the hostile guns, which were thus prevented from playing an important
part in the day's battle.

As soon as the Boers started shelling the camp, the battalion fell in
on its parade-ground in quarter-column and waited for orders. But when
a shell fell just behind the ranks, Major Bird moved it at the double
through the camp to a donga which afforded good cover. The men then
removed their great-coats, and stayed for some minutes watching the
Boer shells passing over their heads. Eventually the King's Royal
Rifles, Royal Irish Fusiliers, and the battalion were ordered by the
General to move in extended order through the town, and to concentrate
in the spruit already occupied by 'B' and 'E' companies. The
Leicesters and 67th Battery were left near the camp to watch Impati
Mountain, since it was probable that the Boer force which had occupied
Newcastle would appear from that direction. The mounted troops (18th
Hussars and the Mounted Infantry company of the Dublin Fusiliers,
under Captain Lonsdale, less Lieutenant Cory's section, which,
fortunately for it, was sent off in another direction), under the
command of Colonel Möller, were sent to turn the right flank of the
Boers' position on Talana Hill and so threaten their rear.

As the extended lines of the infantry moved through the town they were
greeted by pompom fire, which, however, did no damage. It was their
first introduction to this hated and under-rated weapon, whose moral
effect is so great that, even if the casualties it inflicts are small
in number, it is always likely to exercise a marked influence, more
especially on young troops and at the commencement of a campaign. Men
heard it in wonder, asking each other what it was, and why had we
nothing like it, and similar questions. By 6.30 a.m. the three
battalions were assembled in the bed of the spruit, and the General
rode up with the Staff in order to give his orders for the attack. The
2nd Royal Dublin Fusiliers were to form the firing line, with the 60th
Rifles in support and the Royal Irish Fusiliers in reserve. Under
Talana Hill is a wood surrounding a small house known as Smith's Farm.
Between this wood and Sand Spruit is a long stretch of veld, which on
the day of the battle was intersected by several wire fences. The
battalion received orders to cross this open ground by successive
companies, 'H' company, under Lieutenant Shewan, formed the right of
the line, and was the first company to leave the shelter of the
spruit. It made for the south-east corner of the wood, where it was
afterwards joined by the maxims, and at once opened fire on Talana and
Dundee Hills. 'B' company under Captain Dibley, 'A' company under
Major English, and 'E' company under Captain Weldon extended to ten
paces, and followed in succession. The enemy had by this time
developed a vigorous fire, but the range was long and the casualties
small. The advancing companies moved on steadily, reached the edge of
the wood, and entered it. They now became somewhat separated. 'A,' 'G'
(Captain Perreau), and 'F' inclined to the left, 'C' and 'E' remained
in the centre with 'B' on their right, while 'H' was held back at the
corner of the wood. The latter was bounded on the far side by a stone
wall, beyond which stretched an open piece of ground until, further up
the hill, there was a second wall. At this point there was a sudden
change in the slope of the ground, which rose almost precipitously to
the crest. Immediately opposite the point where 'B' company issued
from the wood a third wall ran up the hill, connecting the two already
mentioned. When the attackers reached the far end of the wood, they
came under such a well-directed and heavy fire that their progress was
at first checked, in spite of the support afforded by our artillery,
which rained shrapnel on the hostile position. The Boers, lying behind
the boulders on the crest of Talana Hill, found excellent cover; while
from Dundee Hill they could bring an effective enfilade fire on the
open space between the two parallel walls. Opposite 'A' company a
donga ran up the hill, and at first sight seemed to offer an excellent
line of approach for an attacking force. Major English, in command of
the company, rushed forward and, in spite of a heavy fire, succeeded
in cutting a wire fence which closed the mouth of the donga. He then,
at about 8 a.m., led his company into the latter, and was followed by
'G' and 'F' (Captain Hensley) companies; but the donga proved almost a
death-trap, since it was swept by the rifles of some picked marksmen
on the right of the Boer position.

[Illustration: Casualties at Talana.

  Capt. G. A. WELDON. _Killed._
  Second Lieut. GENGE. _Died of Wounds._
  Capt. A. DIBLEY. _Wounded._
  Major LOWNDES. _Wounded._
  Lieut. C. N. PERREAU. _Wounded._
  Ser.-Maj. (Now Qr.-Mr) BURKE. _Wounded._]

It was impossible for these three companies to advance any further,
and they were therefore forced to limit their efforts to an attempt to
keep down the Boer fire. Meanwhile, General Penn-Symons had, about
9.15 a.m., come up to the far edge of the wood, and crying, 'Dublin
Fusiliers, we must take the hill!' crossed the wall. Shortly
afterwards he received a mortal wound. Captain Weldon was also killed
near the same spot in a gallant effort to help a wounded comrade, No.
5078 Private Gorman. Captain Weldon, together with several men of his
company, had surmounted the wall in face of a heavy fire, and had
taken cover in a small depression on its further side. Private Gorman
was hit in the very act of surmounting the obstacle, and was falling
backwards, when Captain Weldon, rushing out from his cover, seized him
by the arm, and was pulling him into safety when he himself was
mortally wounded. Privates Brady and Smith dragged him in under cover,
but he only lived a few minutes. His dog, a fox-terrier named Rose,
had accompanied him through the fight, and when his body was later on
recovered, the faithful little animal was found beside it, and was
afterwards taken care of by the men of 'E' company. There was no more
popular officer in the regiment than George Weldon, and his loss was
deeply felt by all ranks. He was the first officer of the Dublin
Fusiliers to fall in the war, which thus early asserted its claim to
seize the best. He was buried that same afternoon in the small
cemetery, facing the hill on which he had met his death.

[Illustration: The Last Rites.]

By this time, 9.30 a.m., the Rifles and Irish Fusiliers had closed up
and become merged in the firing line. Slowly, and by the advances of
small parties at a time, the attackers gained ground, principally by
creeping along the transverse wall which afforded cover from the enemy
on Dundee Hill, Helped by the incessant fire of the artillery, which
at 11.30 a.m. moved up to the coalfields railway, the infantry
gradually collected behind the second wall. They were now within 150
yards of the crest, and the roar of battle grew in intensity. About
11.30 a.m. Colonel Yule came up and ordered the hill to be assaulted,
directing the battalion to charge the right flank of the hill, and the
Rifles the centre. Captain Lowndes, who was with the companies on the
right, led them across the wall and over an open piece of ground. He
gave the command 'Right incline,' and so well were the men in hand
that the order was promptly obeyed, shortly after which he was badly
wounded. Meanwhile, in the centre, men of all three regiments, led by
the Staff and regimental officers, dashed over the wall and began to
clamber up the steep and rocky slope. The artillery quickened its fire
and covered the crest with shrapnel. But the Boers still remained
firm. Many of them stood up, their mackintoshes waving in the wind,
and poured a deadly fire on the assaulting infantry. Though most of
these brave burghers paid for their daring with their lives, they
repulsed this first gallant charge. The Dublin Fusiliers suffered many
casualties in this first assault. Captain Lowndes, the Adjutant, had
his leg practically shattered, as he, with the other officers, ran
ahead to lead the charge. Captain Perreau was shot through the chest;
Captain Dibley was almost on the top of the hill when hit. He had a
dim recollection of the gallant Adjutant of the Royal Irish Fusiliers
racing up almost alongside him and within a few paces of the summit,
when he suddenly saw an aged and grey-bearded burgher drawing a bead
upon him at a distance of a few paces only. He snapped his revolver at
him, but only to fall senseless next moment with a bullet through his
head. Marvellous though it seems he made a comparatively speedy
recovery, and was able to ride into Ladysmith, at the head of his
company, in the following February, having been in the hospital in the
besieged town in the interval. Evidence of the temporary nature of
the discomfort caused by a bullet through the head is afforded by the
fact that he is to-day one of the best bridge-players in the regiment.
Poor young Genge, who had only recently joined, was mortally wounded,
and died shortly after the battle, killed in his first fight and in
the springtime of life.

Sergeant-Major Burke's (now Quartermaster) experiences may be best
told in his own words: 'It must have been shortly after poor Weldon
was killed that I came across "E" company; finding no officer with
them I assumed command, and on arrival at the donga handed them over
to Major Bird, and accompanied Colonel Yule, who had just arrived, and
was ascending the hill. We had only gone a few yards, and were about
six paces from the top wall, when I was bowled over, hit in the leg.
It was a hot place, for as I lay there another bullet hit me in the
shoulder. I crawled as well as I could to a rock, and sitting up
underneath it lit a pipe. Scarcely had I got it to draw when a bullet
dashed it out of my hand, taking a small piece of the top of my thumb
with it. Two men were shot dead so close that they fell across my
legs, effectually pinning me to the ground, while two more were
wounded and fell alongside of me. At this juncture Colour-Sergeants
Guilfoyle (now Sergeant-Major) and James dashed out of cover, and,
picking me up, carried me to a more sheltered position, whence I could
see what was going on all round, without myself being seen.' He was
left at Dundee with the wounded, and subsequently taken to Pretoria
with other prisoners of war.

Whilst the men and officers were thus recovering their breath for a
renewed attack, a large number were undoubtedly hit by our own
shrapnel, as they clung closely to the hillside to avoid coming under
fire from the enemy, who still held the top. It was imperative to draw
our gunners' attention to their situation, to effect which purpose, an
intrepid signaller, Private Flynn, Royal Dublin Fusiliers, jumped
up, and at the imminent risk of his own life freely exposed himself in
his endeavour to 'call up' the guns. Finding, after repeated attempts,
that he could not attract their attention, he boldly walked back down
the hillside, torn as it was by mauser fire, and personally delivered
his message, a glorious and courageous example of that devotion to
duty which proved so strongly marked a characteristic of our N.C.O.'s
and privates throughout the war.

Major English now extricated his company from the donga and managed to
reach the second wall, where he collected all available men, including
'F' and 'G' companies, and maintained an incessant fire on Dundee and
Talana Hills. The artillery behind had never slackened in their
efforts to support the infantry, and their shrapnel searched the whole
length of the crest line. This combined fire began at last to tell.
The rattle of the enemy's musketry, which had lasted since 6.30 a.m.,
gradually grew feebler, until about 1 p.m. our infantry made a second
dash across the wall and this time reached the top of the hill. Below
them they saw the stream of flying Boers hurrying across the veld. It
was the moment for a vigorous outburst of musketry, but 'some one
blundered,' and the fleeting moment sped without being taken advantage
of. It is true that those men who first arrived on the summit were
firing away, and were joined in doing so by every other man who
breathlessly arrived. The company officers had just got their men well
in hand, and were directing the fire, when to every one's disgust, and
sheer, blank amazement, the 'Cease fire' sounded clear above the din
of the fight. There was nothing for it but to stop, but the sight of
the enemy streaming away in dense masses just below them, that enemy
who had up to now been pouring a relentless hail of bullets on them
for hours, was too much. Captain Hensley rushed up to Major English,
and after a brief conference, feeling certain the call must have been
blown in error, the latter gave the command to re-open fire. Barely
was it obeyed when the imperative bugle once more blared forth its
interference, and the company officers, the commanders of the
recognised battle-units, had nothing left them but compliance.

The guns with 'D' company as escort had come to the neck between
Talana and Dundee Hills, but did not fire. The fight was over and
Major English formed up the battalion. It then marched back as a
rearguard to the brigade, through Dundee to the camp, much as if after
a field-day, halting half-way to receive an issue of rations sent out
by the A.S.C. It had lost two officers and six men killed, and three
officers and fifty-two men wounded. As the troops passed through the
town they were warmly cheered by the inhabitants. Late in the
afternoon news reached the camp that the Mounted Infantry company,
together with a squadron of the 18th Hussars, had been captured, but
this was kept from the rank and file of the battalion. As already
stated above, Colonel Möller had been sent with the mounted troops
round the right flank of the Boers. He succeeded in his task, but
proceeded too far, and when the enemy retreated from Talana Hill he
found himself with some 200 rifles attempting to stop a force of 4000
Boers. He was roughly handled, but managed to get clear. Then,
unluckily misled by the mist, he lost his way, and, instead of
returning to camp, moved towards Impati Mountain, where he stumbled
into the Boer main commando advancing from Newcastle. He took up a
defensive position, placing the cavalry in a kraal and the mounted
infantry on some rising ground near. The enemy brought up artillery
and soon surrounded him, finally forcing him to surrender.

Talana Hill, in point of numbers, may not rank as a great battle, but
its moral effect can scarcely be exaggerated. It was the first
conflict of the war. It was Majuba reversed, and the issue had
far-reaching consequences. The news of the victory spread quickly
through South Africa, and had considerable influence on the Dutch
Colonists, who were, to use an expressive colloquialism, 'sitting on
the fence,' and kept them sitting there, at a time when had they
descended on the wrong side their action could not have failed to be
extremely prejudicial to the interests of the Empire; but over and
above all else it showed to the world that the British infantry could
still attack and carry a position in face of modern rifle-fire, a
lesson which was never forgotten by Boer or Briton, in spite of after
events. Moreover, Talana must ever be a memorable name in the annals
of the Royal Dublin Fusiliers, since it was the first battle in which
they had fought under their new title, which was from that day on to
become as well known as that of any regiment in the army.

The other regiments engaged had also suffered very severely, the 60th
Rifles losing, amongst other officers, their gallant chief, Colonel
Gunning. It was curious that on the last occasion the 2nd Royal Dublin
Fusiliers had seen active service--the siege and capture of
Mooltan--they should then have fought alongside the 60th, as they did
in the present instance.




CHAPTER II.

THE RETREAT FROM DUNDEE.

  'I am ready to halt.'--_Ps._ xxxviii. 17.


On the morning of October 21st, Colonel Yule, who, as senior officer,
had taken over command of the brigade, received the news that a Boer
commando, under General Joubert, was advancing by the Newcastle road.
As the camp was within long-range artillery fire from Impati Mountain,
the brigade moved off at a moment's notice to the south and took up a
defensive position. The tents were left standing, but each man carried
a waterproof sheet, a blanket, and great-coat, while the waggons,
massed in rear, had three to four days' supplies. Soon after 4:30 p.m.
the enemy appeared on Impati, and at once opened fire with a big gun,
probably a forty-pounder. The shells at first fell in the vacated
camp, but the Boer artillerymen quickly discovered the brigade, and
made good practice, although they caused but slight damage. Our
batteries attempted to reply, but were outranged, their shells falling
far short. Luckily for us a mist came on, and the Boer gun ceased
firing.

As soon as night fell the troops began to entrench themselves, for the
situation of the brigade was sufficiently unpleasant. In front was an
enemy with superior numbers and heavier artillery, and in rear,
between Dundee and Ladysmith, another hostile force of unknown
strength. To make matters worse, it rained persistently and the night
was cold. About 3 a.m. the brigade retreated to Indumana Kopje, some
one and a half miles to the south-east of the camp. Here a new
position was taken up before dawn, the guns and transport being massed
behind the hill in order to be out of sight from Impati.

Early in the morning of the 22nd, the spirits of the small force were
raised by the news of the victory at Elandslaagte. This caused great
delight among the men: they were proud of their own victory at Talana,
and this further success roused them to a still higher pitch of
enthusiasm. The strategic side of the situation seldom appeals to the
rank and file, and the consequence was that when the retreat was
commenced they were under the impression that they were being led to
yet another victory. When they were undeceived, they were undoubtedly
very savage, especially so at, what seemed to them, the callous
desertion of their wounded comrades in Dundee.

Since it was possible that some of the defeated Boers might be
retreating through the Biggarsberg, a demonstration towards Glencoe
Junction was ordered, the troops detailed being the 2nd Royal Dublin
Fusiliers, the 60th Rifles, one battery, and some cavalry. No time was
given for breakfasts, but the detachment moved off at 8 a.m. with the
battalion as advance guard. On arriving within 1500 yards of the
Junction, the battery shelled a party of the enemy on a hill to the
west of the railway, a proceeding which promptly provoked an answer
from the Boer gun on Impati, but another timely mist and rain saved
the detachment from this unwelcome attention. No Boers were seen in
the pass, so the force, with the battalion as rearguard, returned to
Indumana Kopje at 12.30 p.m., when they were able to obtain dinners,
the majority of the men having been without food for twenty-four
hours.

At 9 p.m. that evening orders were issued for the reoccupation of
Talana Hill by the whole force, but the various commanding officers
were informed confidentially that Colonel Yule's real intention was a
retreat to Ladysmith by the Helpmakaar road. It was an extremely dark
night, and the battalion occupied nearly two hours in collecting the
companies and reaching the place of assembly at the foot of the
kopje. It was not until after 11 p.m. that the brigade actually
started on the retreat in the following order: 1st 60th Rifles
(advance-guard), 1st Royal Irish Fusiliers, 13th Battery, Mounted
Infantry, Transport, 67th and 69th Batteries, 2nd Royal Dublin
Fusiliers, 18th Hussars, 1st Leicestershire Regiment (rearguard). The
force occupied about four miles of road. The route was through Dundee,
over Sand Spruit, and down the Helpmakaar road through the Coalfields
village. It was impossible to find an opportunity for a return to the
camp, which was left standing. All the tents, stores, and baggage,
together with the wounded, were left to the enemy. The battalion thus
lost its band instruments and camp equipment, while the officers had
to sacrifice all their personal kit, and many articles belonging to
the mess. The waggons carried nothing but supplies, and no one in the
force was able to take away anything beyond what he carried on his
person.

[Illustration: Armourer-Sergeant Waite. 'Delenda Est Carthago.']

The column marched throughout the night, and far into the morning of
the 23rd, only halting at 10 a.m., when dinners were eaten on the
high ground south of Blesbok Pass, about fifteen miles from Dundee.
That the Boers were watching the retreat was proved by one of their
heliographs trying to 'pick up' the column. The march was resumed
after a two hours' rest, and continued to Beith (twenty-one miles from
Dundee), where, at 3 p.m., another halt was made. The men cooked their
teas, and had a chance of a brief sleep, but at 11 p.m. they had to
start again. The road, a very bad one, lay through the pass leading to
the Waschbank River. The battalion formed the advance-guard, with two
Natal mounted policemen as guides. It was a weary tramp, for, owing to
the wretched road, long halts were necessary in order to allow the
waggons to close up. At dawn, the 18th Hussars took over the duties of
advance-guard, and were supported by 'F' company, under Captain
Hensley.

During the night a mysterious heliograph was seen twinkling and
blinking away on the left flank. After some difficulty it was
ascertained that it was communicating with the farm of a man named
Potgieter, professedly a British subject. He was, in fact, caught _in
flagrante delicto_ in full communication with the unknown Boer
signaller, and paid for his crime with his life.

At 10 a.m. on the 24th, the head of the column reached the Waschbank
(thirty-six miles), crossed, and halted on the south side of the
river. The waggons were not over until 12.30 p.m. A welcome meal and a
bathe in the stream refreshed the men, some of whom had had no proper
sleep for three nights. Heavy firing was heard from the direction of
Ladysmith, and the mounted troops, with the artillery, were sent off
to reconnoitre and see if they could render any assistance to Sir
George White. They met with nothing, however, and returned before 5
p.m. Meanwhile the infantry had also been disturbed, for at 2 p.m.
they recrossed the river in order to occupy a better position to
oppose a rumoured pursuit of the Boers. As the latter did not appear,
the river was again forded at 4 p.m., and only just in time. A violent
thunderstorm burst, and the water rose ten feet in two hours. 'H'
company, under Lieutenant Shewan, and a patrol of the 18th Hussars
were left on the north bank, and were thus cut off from the main body
for several hours.

It rained in torrents until 11 p.m., and the battalion, formed in
quarter-column, had to lie down in pools of water, and get what sleep
it could. At 5 a.m. on the 25th, in bright sunshine, the retreat was
resumed. 'H' company crossed to the south bank a few minutes before
the column moved off, although the water was still up to the men's
waists. The Dublin Fusiliers formed the rearguard, and marched till
mid-day, when Sunday's River (forty-eight miles) was reached. 'A'
company remained on the north bank to cover the crossing of the
waggons, and at 2.30 p.m. the column went on, only halting at 4.30 for
tea. Everybody hoped to have a long rest here, but at 6.30 p.m. Major
Bird was sent for, and informed that, as the Boers were in close
pursuit, a night march was necessary.

The brigade accordingly started at 7 p.m., at the same moment that
heavy rain began to fall. The road quickly became inches deep in mud,
every one was soon wet to the skin, and the night was so dark that a
man in each section of fours had to hold on to the canteen strap of
the man in front in order to keep the proper direction. As an
additional evil, the battalion was still rearguard, which is generally
the most tiring position in a column. Halts were frequent, and the men
were so exhausted that many of them, when they stopped for a moment,
fell down in the mud and slept. Soon after midnight the 18th Hussars,
who were keeping connection between the Irish Fusiliers and the
rearguard, disappeared. It was so dark that the latter could have no
certainty of being on the right road, but was obliged to struggle on
blindly. Majors Bird and English established a code of signals by
whistle, in order to keep the companies closed up. Dawn still found
the battalion marching, dead tired, but luckily in its proper place
behind the column, and without a man missing. It was not until 8 a.m.
on the 26th that this wearisome march ended. Then Modderspruit, seven
miles north of Ladysmith, and sixty-five from Dundee, was reached, and
the men sank down, too weary to care about anything. After a brief
interval, however, they recovered sufficiently to eat their bully beef
and biscuits. It had been a trying march for all, although the column
had accomplished only twelve miles in eleven hours. As an instance of
the general weariness, it is recorded that a subaltern, during the
meal, was asked to pass the mustard, and fell asleep with his arm
outstretched and the mustard-pot in his hand.

But the brigade was still not allowed to rest. At 11 a.m. it was on
the 'trek' again, and marched till 2 p.m., when the long retreat came
to an end, and Ladysmith was entered. Here the Devonshire and
Gloucestershire Regiments earned the undying gratitude of the regiment
by providing officers and men with a meal, as well as by pitching a
camp for them.

On arriving at Ladysmith, tents, equipment, mules, and, in fact, all
that had been lost at Dundee, were issued, and the battalion went into
camp near the cemetery.

The column was fortunate in having Colonel (now General) Dartnell with
it. This officer, after serving with distinction for many years in the
regular army, had, on retirement, settled down in Natal, where he was,
previous to the war, in command of the Natal Police. A great hunter
and fisherman, he knew every inch of the country, knowledge which
proved of invaluable assistance in the trying march.




CHAPTER III.

FROM COLENSO TO ESTCOURT.

  'If thou hope to please all, thy hopes are vaine;
  If thou feare to displease some, thy feares are idle.'

                              _Francis Quarles._


On October 28th Colonel Cooper arrived at Ladysmith from England and
took over the command from Major Bird. The battalion was able to rest
from the 27th to the 29th, and recover from the fatigue of the retreat
to Ladysmith.

The Headquarter Staff issued orders on the 29th for a general
movement, to take place the next day, against the enemy, who were
closing in on the town. The Dublin Fusiliers formed part of Colonel
Grimwood's brigade, which also included the 1st and 2nd King's Royal
Rifles, the Leicesters, and the Liverpools. The task assigned to
Colonel Grimwood was the capture of Long Hill.

In order to be in position for the assault by dawn, it was necessary
for the brigade to make a night march, and the battalion paraded about
9.30 p.m. on Sunday evening, the 29th October. It formed the rear of
the brigade, to which was attached a brigade of artillery. 'F' and 'B'
companies were left behind on piquet duty.

Owing to the difficulties inherent in a night march, and, perhaps,
also to faulty staff management, the artillery, the Dublin Fusiliers,
and Liverpool Regiment diverged from the route followed by the rest of
the brigade. As a result of this mistake the battalion took
practically no part in the battle of the 30th, but, after a vain
endeavour to find Colonel Grim wood's force, spent the morning lying
on the crest of a small ridge near Lombard's Kop. It came under shell
and long-range rifle fire, but lost no men. The attempt to drive back
the Boers was a failure, and the army fell back on Ladysmith about
mid-day. The battalion reached camp at 2 p.m. and was dismissed. All
ranks were somewhat tired, for the sun had been hot, and after dinner
sleep reigned supreme.

[Illustration: Railway Bridge at Colenso.]

But about 4 p.m. Colonel Cooper received from Headquarters an order to
proceed by train to Colenso, with the object of protecting the
important railway bridge which crosses the Tugela at that place. The
Natal Field Artillery, in addition to his own unit, was placed under
his command. On the receipt of this order, camp was struck, and the
tents and baggage sent down to the station. The piquets found by the
Dublin Fusiliers were ordered to be relieved by other corps, but
although 'F' company, under Captain Hensley, came in, Lieutenant H. W.
Higginson's piquet, on the ridge to the east of the cemetery, could
not rejoin in time, principally owing to the fact that the greater
part of the Gloucestershire Regiment, which had been detailed to find
the relief, had been captured at Nicholson's Nek. Lieutenant Higginson
and his men were thus left to share in the siege of Ladysmith. The
battalion transport, under Lieutenant Renny, also had to remain
behind. An account of their experiences during the siege is given by
Lieutenant Renny in Chapter IX.

With these exceptions the whole battalion marched down to the station
soon after 11 p.m., and was dispatched in two trains. As Boers had
been reported on Bulwana Hill during the afternoon, a certain amount
of risk seemed to attend the journey. There was nothing to prevent the
enemy from cutting the line at any point in the hilly country between
Ladysmith and Pieter's Station, while even a small hostile force could
have played havoc with the crowded trucks.

However, the enemy had luckily not penetrated to the railway line, and
after an uneventful, though unpleasant, journey, Colenso was reached
at 4.30 a.m. on the 31st.

The two railway bridges over the Tugela and Onderbrook Spruit were
already protected by a small force, consisting of the Durban Light
Infantry, a squadron of the Imperial Light Horse, and a detachment of
the Natal Naval Volunteers, with a gun. These units had made good
defensive works, notably Forts Wylie and Molyneux, guarding the
railway bridges over the Tugela and Onderbrook Spruit respectively.

We encamped some 300 yards south-west of Colenso, and the day (October
31st) was spent in making further defences, and dividing the garrison
into sections. Colenso was not, however, an easy place to defend. It
was commanded by the lofty hills on the left bank of the Tugela, and
by Hlangwane Hill on the right bank to the east of the village. The
garrison, moreover, was lacking in artillery, having only some
muzzle-loading guns with a very limited range. Colonel Cooper
telegraphed to Maritzburg asking for a naval twelve-pounder, which,
however, could not be obtained.

[Illustration: Major-General C. D. Cooper, C.B. Commanding 2nd Royal
Dublin Fusiliers in Natal.]

The necessity for such an addition soon arose. At 8.15 a.m. on
November 1st, the staff at Ladysmith sent a wire to say that a Boer
force had moved at daybreak towards Colenso. On receipt of this news
the garrison was warned to be ready, and patrols of the Imperial Light
Horse and the Mounted Infantry section of the battalion were
dispatched towards Ladysmith, Springfield, and the country beyond
Hlangwane. These patrols returned soon after 1 p.m., and the party
which had reconnoitred towards Ladysmith reported that it had come
into touch and exchanged shots with the enemy. Later on in the
afternoon, Lieutenant Cory, commanding the Mounted Infantry section,
went out again and reported that he had seen a hostile force,
estimated at 2000 men, which was off-saddled near the main Ladysmith
road, some six miles out. He had skirmished with the scouts of this
commando and had lost one man. Another wire came from Ladysmith at the
same time announcing that the enemy had guns. Our piquets were, in
consequence of these events, pushed forward to the horseshoe ridge on
the left bank of the Tugela, while the parties guarding the two
bridges (road and railway) over this river were reinforced. The night,
however, passed quietly.

Mounted patrols were sent out at dawn of the 2nd, and Lieutenant Cory
was able to report, at 6.45 a.m., that the Boers were still in the
same position. But two hours later he forwarded another message to the
effect that the enemy was advancing on Grobelaar's Kloof. Soon
afterwards distant rifle-shots were heard, and the Mounted Infantry
retired into camp. About 10 a.m. parties of the enemy appeared on the
top of Grobelaar's Mountain, and by the aid of a good telescope it
could be seen that they were busily engaged in digging. Their
intention was not long in doubt, for a thin cloud became visible on
the sky-line, and the next moment a shell buried itself in the
river-bank.

Colonel Cooper at once ordered the tents to be lowered and the
trenches to be manned. But the enemy made no signs of attacking
Colenso, and contented themselves by occasionally firing shells which
invariably fell short. The interruption of telegraphic communication
with Ladysmith soon after 3 p.m. proved, however, that the enemy was
not being idle. Groups of Boers could be seen on the hills overhanging
the railway, and a train carrying General French was shelled after
leaving Pieters. The activity of our foes assumed a more aggressive
character when, about 5 p.m., they began to bombard Fort Molyneux.
From Colenso the shrapnel could be plainly seen bursting over the
work, and the piquets on the left bank of the Tugela reported that
heavy rifle-fire was in progress. As the garrison of the fort
consisted only of eighty men of the Durban Light Infantry, some
anxiety was felt regarding their safety, and this uneasiness was
intensified by the arrival of one of the defenders, who announced that
the redoubt was hard pressed. Lieutenant Shewan, with one hundred men
mostly from 'E' company, was promptly dispatched to reinforce them in
the armoured train. He found that the fort had been evacuated, but
managed to pick up several of the garrison in spite of the enemy's
rifle and shrapnel fire. Captain Hensley, who was holding the
horseshoe ridge, also advanced with 'F' company, and, by firing
long-range volleys, helped to cover the retirement of the remainder of
the garrison, the whole of which reached Colenso in the night. Colonel
Cooper telegraphed an account of these events to Brigadier-General
Wolfe-Murray at Maritzburg, who replied at nightfall that, since the
safety of Colenso bridge was very important, he would send the Border
Regiment next day to reinforce the garrison. But no mention was made
of any artillery.

Colonel Cooper had now a difficult decision to arrive at. In front of
him lay a superior force of the enemy with guns far outranging his own
obsolete muzzle-loaders, and during the afternoon disquieting rumours,
which might be true, of another commando at Springfield had reached
him. Ladysmith was invested, and the small garrisons of Colenso and
Estcourt alone stood between the Boers and Maritzburg. Having
consulted the senior officers of the garrison, Colonel Cooper sent
another wire to General Wolfe-Murray explaining the situation, and in
reply was authorised to fall back to Estcourt if he could not hold
Colenso. About 10 p.m. he reluctantly determined to retire.

The mounted troops and the Natal Field Artillery went by road,
starting at midnight. It was decided to send the rest of the garrison
by railway, and the stationmaster at Colenso, with great energy,
succeeded in obtaining three trains which arrived in the early hours
of November 3rd.

The operation of entraining was at once commenced. The night was dark,
and the packing of all the tents, supplies, and equipment in the
trucks proceeded but slowly. The Natal Naval Volunteers had to bring
their nine-pounder gun down the steep slope of Fort Wylie, a task
requiring great care and time; the piquets on the left bank of the
river had to be withdrawn, and the two bridges guarded up to the very
last moment. Although everything was done in the utmost possible
silence, it yet seemed that the necessary shunting of the trains must
warn the Boers of the evacuation, and bring on an attack. But there
was no interruption, and the last train steamed out of Colenso station
half an hour before dawn.

Estcourt was reached two hours later. The little town was already
occupied by a detachment of the Imperial Light Horse and Natal Mounted
Rifles. During the morning there also arrived from Maritzburg the 2nd
Border Regiment,[2] afterwards to be the comrades of the battalion in
the 5th Brigade.

         [Footnote 2: A great friendship sprang up between this
         celebrated regiment and ourselves.]

Colonel Cooper took over the command of the garrison and immediately
set to work on the arrangement of the defences. The next day, however,
General Wolfe-Murray and his staff appeared on the scene. Estcourt had
thus the honour of having three different commandants in two days.




CHAPTER IV.

ESTCOURT AND FRERE.

  'Great men are not always wise: neither do the aged understand
  judgment.'--_Job_, xxxii. 9.


The stay at Estcourt (November 3rd to 26th) was a period of great
anxiety and hard work. That there was cause for anxiety may be easily
understood when the state of affairs is remembered. The Army Corps had
not yet arrived from England, nor could any fresh troops be expected
before the 10th. The Boers had invaded Natal, had shut up in Ladysmith
the only British army in the field, and could still afford to send
five or six thousand men against Maritzburg. The Estcourt garrison
alone stood in their way.

There were necessarily many outposts, and tours were long and
frequent. Thunderstorms, Natal thunderstorms, visited the town with
painful regularity, and rendered piquet work even more uncomfortable
than usual. It was a period of strained waiting, when every one
wondered whether a Boer commando or a British brigade would be the
first arrival. Reliable news was scarce, though rumours of every kind
were rife.

The battalion was encamped in the market square, while the officers
inhabited a small room encumbered with planks. Trenches covered the
town to the north and north-east, and were pushed forward some two
miles on the Weenen road. The citadel, so to speak, was the sugar-loaf
hill, on which Lieutenant James, R.N., constructed, towards the middle
of the month, emplacements for his two naval twelve-pounders. These
guns arrived on November 14th, a welcome addition to the garrison,
which had been strengthened on the 13th by the West Yorkshire
Regiment. These reinforcements came at an opportune moment, for the
Boers had at last moved forward and on November 14th their patrols
were close to Estcourt. Their approach caused a certain amount of
alarm, and at first the evacuation of the town was proposed. The camp
was even struck, and a great part of the baggage was put on to trains
which were kept ready in the station. Later on other counsels
prevailed, and tents were raised again. It had rained most of the day,
and a general wetting was the chief result of this 'scare.' The Boers
quickly made their presence felt, and the next day inflicted a severe
blow on the garrison.

Our mounted troops had been busily engaged in reconnaissance work, and
in an evil hour it occurred to the authorities that the armoured train
was also an excellent means of gaining news. Captain Hensley had taken
it to Colenso on the 5th and 6th, and on the latter day surprised a
party of Boers engaged in looting the village. The dispatch of the
train, unsupported by any mounted troops, soon became almost a matter
of daily routine. This defiance of common sense could have only one
result. On November 15th, Captain Haldane,[3] of the Gordon
Highlanders, went out in the train with 'A' company and some men of
the Durban Light Infantry. He reached Frere and, learning from a Natal
policeman that the front was clear, pushed on to Chieveley. Here he
saw in the distance a small body of the enemy moving southwards, and,
having telegraphed the information to Estcourt, turned back. But as
the train was running down a steep gradient the Boers suddenly opened
fire with two guns from a ridge to the west of the line. Almost
immediately afterwards the train was derailed by stones placed on the
line, and the leading truck upset, thus stopping the engine.

         [Footnote 3: He had been wounded at Elandslaagte, and, being
         unable to rejoin his corps in Ladysmith, was attached to the
         battalion.]

It was a predicament trying to the nerves of even the bravest. The
Boer shells were well aimed, and came in quick succession. But Captain
Haldane and his men did all that could be done. Lieutenant Frankland
directed from the rear truck a vigorous fire, which kept the enemy at
a respectful distance, and even made them shift their gun. Meanwhile
Mr. Winston Churchill, who had accompanied the expedition as a Press
correspondent, collected some men and set to work to push the derailed
truck off the line. They were exposed to a heavy fire, but eventually
succeeded in their task. The train began to move again; luck did not,
however, favour them, for the coupling between the engine and rear
truck was broken by a shell. Then Captain Haldane ordered the engine
to return to Estcourt with as many wounded men as possible, while he
attempted with the remainder of the force to reach Frere station. The
engine reached Estcourt, but Captain Haldane was not so fortunate. The
men left the trucks and started to run along the line. No sooner did
our rifle-fire cease than the Boers galloped down the hill and, before
Captain Haldane could realise the danger, they were among the men, and
he had no course open but to surrender. The casualties of 'A' company
were three men killed, four or five wounded, and forty-two prisoners.
Private Kavanagh afterwards received the Distinguished Conduct Medal
for his gallantry on this occasion. The sound of the Boer guns could
be distinctly heard at Estcourt, and great anxiety was felt. A little
group of officers assembled in the trenches to the west of the
station, and eagerly scanned the country through their glasses.
Nothing could be seen, and the firing had ceased. Suddenly through the
air rang the shrill whistle of an engine, and at the sound every one
gave a sigh of relief. It was the armoured train, and all was well.
Another whistle, and round a sharp curve steamed the engine--but,
alas! without the trucks. It was evident that a disaster had occurred,
although particulars were not received until late in the afternoon;
while it was weeks later before the list of casualties could be
ascertained. Luckily this mishap occurred when the situation had in
other respects improved. The Army Corps was landing, and troops were
being pushed forward as quickly as possible. On the 16th, Estcourt was
reinforced by the 2nd Queen's and 2nd East Surreys of General
Hildyard's brigade, and General Barton's Fusilier brigade was
assembling at Mooi River.

The Boers were thus too late, and so lost the opportunity of capturing
Maritzburg. Although they doubtless knew of the arrival of fresh
troops, they still advanced, and, moving round Estcourt, appeared on
the hills to the north-west of Mooi River station. A detachment
reconnoitred Estcourt on the 18th, but a couple of shells from
Lieutenant James's naval guns induced them to stay at a distance.

The telegraph line south of the town was interrupted on the 22nd, and
for a brief period the garrison was cut off from the rest of the
world. But the action of Willow Grange, in which the battalion took no
part, caused a retirement of the enemy, who retreated through Weenen
on the 24th.

Their retreat was in no degree molested by our troops; but on November
26th the long-desired advance took place. It was an exhilarating
feeling to leave Estcourt, and lose sight of those hills and trenches,
the scene of so many weary vigils. The army did not, however, make a
big stride forward. The advance was only to Frere, some ten miles
nearer the Tugela.

As the column started at 8 a.m. there seemed every prospect of an easy
day. But on active service it is never safe to assume anything.
Although no opposition was met with, and the mounted troops hardly saw
a Boer, the progress was very slow, and sunset found the rear of the
column still three miles distant from Frere. The battalion had the
ill-luck to be in the rearguard, behind a seemingly interminable line
of transport. Then the inevitable drift intervened, and waggon after
waggon broke down. Finally, part of the transport decided to halt till
the morning, and the unfortunate rearguard was obliged to form a line
of outposts. As the battalion transport was some distance in front,
this meant no blankets, no food, nothing save a limited amount of
Natal water. The men were not allowed to consume the emergency
rations, and therefore had to suffer from cold and hunger. The night
passed somehow, however, and with the break of day we marched into
Frere, to find our waggons and obtain food.

Another monotonous fortnight was spent at Frere, the only excitement
being the arrival of fresh troops and the building of a temporary
railway bridge over the Blaukranz. The arrival of Sir Redvers Buller
and his staff gave hopes of an early advance, and everybody discussed
what our General ought to do, strategical plans becoming as numerous
as sandstorms.

Since leaving Ladysmith, the 2nd Dublin Fusiliers had not been
attached to a brigade, and now that the Army Corps had come there were
not wanting pessimists who foretold that as the battalion was nobody's
child it would be sent to guard the lines of communication. Early in
December, however, it was assigned to General Hart's 5th, or Irish,
Brigade, in place of the 1st Battalion. The latter was ordered to send
three companies, with a total strength of 287 men, to make up for the
wastage of six weeks' operations. These companies, which were
commanded by Major Tempest Hicks, arrived on December 7th, and were
allowed at first to maintain a separate organization, so that the 2nd
Battalion had eleven companies.

[Illustration: Capt. C. F. ROMER (standing) and Capt. E.
FETHERSTONHAUGH.]

The 5th Brigade was encamped close behind the ridge which lies to the
north-west of the railway station. General Hart utilised the fortnight
at Frere in making his battalions accustomed to his methods. Every
day the whole brigade stood to arms an hour before dawn, and advanced
up the slope of the ridge, where it stayed until scouts had reported
the front all clear. The General was also very particular about the
cleanliness of the camp, and made it a rule to go through the lines
every morning.




CHAPTER V.

THE BATTLE OF COLENSO.

  'Never shame to hear what you have nobly done.'--_Coriolanus._


On December 12th, the 6th and Naval Brigades marched from Frere to
Chieveley, and the rest of the army followed the next day. The
battalion happened to be finding the outposts, and could not march
with the 5th Brigade. Some delay in collecting the companies was
experienced, so it was not until 1 p.m. that a start was made, and
darkness came on before Chieveley was reached. It was, however, a
glorious moonlight night, and marching across the veld had a charm
which even the dust could not quite destroy. But romance soon gave way
to more worldly feelings when, on arriving at Chieveley about 8 p.m.,
it became necessary to find the brigade camp among the hundreds of
tents already pitched.

On the evening of the 14th, it was known that the army was to advance
next day, and attempt the passage of the Tugela. Colonel Cooper
assembled his officers in order to explain the Divisional and Brigade
orders. He stated that the 5th Brigade would cross the river at a
drift two miles west of Colenso, then move down the left bank so as to
take in rear the Boers defending Colenso bridge, which would be
attacked by the 2nd Brigade. The Brigade orders detailed the Dublin
Fusiliers to lead the advance to the river, and afterwards to cover
the rear of the brigade when it moved down the left bank. General Hart
urged in addition the necessity of keeping the men well in hand. They
were to cheer in the event of a charge, but were not to be allowed to
make a wild rush.

[Illustration: 2 miles West of Colenso. Genl. Hart's flank attack from
the Boer Point of View. 15th Dec/99. From a sketch by Col. H. Tempest
Hicks, C.B.]

Every one was early astir on December 15th. Breakfasts were at 3 a.m.,
but before that hour tents had been struck and packed in the
waggons, on which great-coats, blankets, and mess-tins were also
placed, so that the men only carried their haversacks, water-bottles,
rifles, and 150 rounds. The brigade fell in at 3.30 a.m. It was still
quite dark, and the Brigadier spent the ensuing half-hour in drilling
his command. The advance was commenced just as the eastern horizon
grew grey with the dawn.

The battalion, which led the brigade, deployed into line to the right,
and then advanced by fours from the right of companies. In front rode
the General with his staff and a Kaffir guide; behind came the other
three battalions of the brigade in mass. The deployment of the
battalion had brought 'A' on the left, and 'H' and the three companies
of the 1st Battalion on the right.

In this order the brigade moved across the broad expanse of veld,
leading to the banks of the Tugela. In front, beyond the river, rose
tier on tier of ridges and kopjes, backed by the towering mass of
Grobelaar's Kloof. In the morning light they looked strangely quiet
and deserted. Only on a spur to the left front could be seen a few
black specks, the figures of watching Boers.

Soon the naval guns in front of Chieveley opened fire, dropping their
shells on the horseshoe ridge to the north of Colenso, and into a
kraal further to the west. But no answer came. The brigade moved on,
tramping through the long grass, wet with the dew. There was a
momentary halt in order to cross a spruit running diagonally across
the line of march. The ridges in front grew nearer and plainer. They
still seemed deserted, although the eyes of many foes might be
watching the advancing khaki-clad troops. Behind came the thunder of
the big guns, and the shells screamed in the air overhead. It was past
6 a.m. Suddenly the hiss of a shell sounded marvellously close, there
was a metallic clang, and a cloud of dust arose some hundred yards in
front. It was a Boer shrapnel, and the battle had begun.

Each company of the battalion, without waiting for orders,
'front-formed,' and doubled forward. The mounted officers at once
dismounted, Major Hicks' horse being shot under him as he was in the
very act of getting off its back. Somehow it did not seem a bit
strange to him at the time that his horse should be down, and it never
occurred to him then that it had been shot. Another shrapnel burst
over the line and then the enemy's musketry blazed forth, finding an
excellent target in the massed brigade, which was deploying as best it
could.

[Illustration: Boer Trenches, Colenso.]

The battalion was dangerously crowded together, for it had been
advancing as if drilling on the barrack square, although Colonel
Cooper had tried to open out to double company interval, a proceeding
which the General had promptly counter-ordered. But all did their
best. The men rushed forward after their officers, and at their signal
lay down in the long grass, whence fire was opened at the invisible
foe.

It was very difficult to discover the Boer positions. There was one
long trench near the kraal which the naval guns had been shelling,
and further to the west could be seen another parapet from which came
an occasional puff of smoke betraying a Martini rifle and black
powder. But if the Boers could not be seen, they could be both heard
and felt. There was one ceaseless rattle of mausers, and a constant
hum of bullets only drowned by the scream of the shells.

[Illustration: Casualties at Colenso.

  Capt. BACON. _Killed._
  Lieut. HENRY. _Killed._
  Capt. H. M. SHEWAN. _Wounded._
  Major GORDON (_1st Battalion, attached_). _Wounded._
  Second Lieut. MACLEOD (_1st Battalion, attached_). _Wounded._]

Short rushes were made as a rule, and the flank companies edged away
in order to give room for a more reasonable extension. But no sooner
had the battalion opened out than it was reinforced by companies of
the Connaught Rangers, and, later, of the Inniskilling Fusiliers and
the Border Regiment. In a comparatively short time, after the first
Boer shell, the 5th Brigade had been practically crowded into one
line. Officers led men of all the four regiments, and encouraged them
with the cry, 'Come on, the Irish Brigade!'

There was no control, no cohesion, no arrangement in the attack. No
attempt was made to support, by the careful fire of one part of the
line, the advance of the remainder; nor did any order from the higher
ranks reach the firing line. Small groups of men, led by an officer,
jumped up, dashed forward a few scores of yards, and then lay down.
Nobody knew where the drift was, nobody had a clear idea of what was
happening. All pushed forward blindly, animated by the sole idea of
reaching the river-bank.

On the left, part of the battalion was almost on the river when the
Boers first opened fire, and quickly reached the bank. After a short
halt they turned to their right and moved in single file along the
river, being exposed all the time to a heavy fire. They passed through
a kraal, and eventually, not being able to find the drift, assembled
in a hollow, where they stayed until orders to retire reached them.
The centre and right advanced through low scrub into a loop of the
river. Some sections of the 1st Battalion, on the extreme right, came
upon a spruit, and, under shelter of its banks, pushed ahead of the
line.

Thus, by short and constant rushes, the assailants worked their way
forward. A brigade of field artillery was supporting the attack from
behind, but they found it as difficult as the infantry did to locate
the Boers, and most of their shells were quite harmless to the enemy,
while a few dropped close to the attacking infantry. They aided the
latter indirectly, however, since the Boer guns turned their attention
to them.

General Sir Redvers Buller had early recognised the difficulties of
the 5th Brigade, and sent orders for it to retire. But it is easier to
send a force into a battle than to draw it back. The great difficulty
at Colenso was to communicate with the company officers, who had to be
left entirely to their own 'initiative.' Finally an officer of the
Connaught Rangers volunteered to take to the firing line General
Hart's written order to retire. He succeeded in reaching the front,
but then, thinking he had struck the right of the line, turned to his
left. In reality he had gone to the centre of the attack, and,
consequently, the retirement was carried out partially and by
fractions. The left fell back about 10 a.m. in good order, though the
Boers, as usual, redoubled their fire when they saw their foes begin
to retreat. The centre and right, having received no order nor
warning, clung to their ground, and in some cases even made a further
advance. Section after section, however, gradually realised that their
left flank was uncovered and a general retreat of the brigade in
progress. A score of men, under the command of an officer, would rise
up and double back, causing, as they did so, an instant quickening of
the enemy's fire. All around the running figures the bullets splashed,
raising little jets of dust. Occasionally a man would stumble forward,
or sink down as if tired, but it seemed wonderful that the rain of
bullets did not claim more victims. They claimed enough, however, of
the unfortunate three companies of the 1st Battalion, whom the order
to retire never reached. Till 1 p.m., and the arrival of the Boers,
they lay where they were, suffering a loss of some 60 per cent. When
at last Major Hicks realised the situation, he touched with his stick
the man on his right, to tell him to pass the word to retire, but he
touched a dead man; he turned to the left, only to touch another
corpse. One company was brought out of action by a lance-corporal.
Then the Boers arrived, and began making prisoners. One shouted to
Major Hicks for his revolver; he replied that he had not got one--it
was in his holsters on his dead horse--and stalked indignantly off the
battlefield, without another question being put to him.

Major Gordon, who was commanding one of the three companies of the 1st
Battalion, had been shot through the knee early in the day by a rifle
bullet. He lay for two hours or so momentarily expecting to be hit
again. After a time he noticed that as long as he lay still no bullets
came in his direction, but that the moment he attempted to move there
would be a vicious hiss and spurt of sand and dust close beside him.
In spite of this he managed to crawl through a pool of blood to a
neighbouring ant-heap, which offered some sort of protection, and into
which a bullet plunged just as he reached it. Here he remained till
the retirement, when, assisted by two sergeants of the regiment,
Keenan and Dillon, he managed to hobble away. Even then he noticed
that as long as they kept away from the troops who were still actively
engaged few bullets came their way, as though the Boers were purposely
not firing at the wounded.

The Boer heavy artillery pursued the retiring troops with shells,
which made a prodigious noise, and raised clouds of dust, but seldom
did any damage. Gradually a region of comparative peace was reached,
where the ground was not being continually struck by bullets, and only
an occasional shell fell. The extended lines of the 4th Brigade,
ordered to cover the retirement, came into view, and behind them the
men of the Irish Brigade collected again in companies and battalions.
Then, although the artillery was still roaring fiercely, and the
mausers rattled with tireless persistence, the brigade trudged back to
its former camping-ground, pitched tents, and began to cook dinners. A
prosaic but practical ending to an impossible attack.

But there was still one task to accomplish--the preparation of the
casualty list: The regiment had suffered heavily. Two officers,
Captain Bacon (1st Battalion) and Lieutenant Henry, had been killed,
and three, Major Gordon (1st Battalion), Captain Shewan, and
Lieutenant Macleod (1st Battalion), wounded. The total casualties were
219, of whom 52 were killed. Among the latter were Colour-Sergeant
Gage (mortally wounded) and Sergeant Hayes.

Captain Bacon (1st Battalion) was killed by a bullet, and must have
died immediately. He had previously served for a short time with the
2nd Battalion, in which he had many friends, and his loss was bitterly
deplored by Officers, N.C.O.'s, and Privates alike.

Lieutenant Henry had scarcely two years' service, but had in that
short space of time endeared himself to every one in the regiment, and
was as smart and efficient a young officer as ever joined it. His
death must also have been mercifully instantaneous, as he was hit by a
shell.

Second Lieutenant Macleod had only joined the 1st Battalion a few days
before it left the Curragh on November 10th. He was very severely
wounded, his thigh being broken, and although his leg was saved, it
was left two inches shorter than it had been, and in the end he had to
leave the service on this account.

Major Gordon (1st Battalion), who received a Brevet
Lieutenant-Colonelcy for his services, was invalided home, but came
out again later on; while Captain Shewan, who had been shot through
the leg by a bullet, was back at work again in twelve days, a sterling
proof of that devotion to duty which was later on rewarded by the
well-merited distinction of the D.S.O.

[Illustration: Group of Twenty Sergeants taken after the Battle of
Colenso. All that remained of forty-eight who left Maritzburg.

The names reading from left to right in rows are:--(back row) Sergt.
Hanna; Band-Sergt. Cragg; Sergt. Davis; Lance-Sergt. Cullen; Sergt.
Rooney; Arm.-Sergt. Waite; Col.-Sergt. Cossey; Sergt. Smith; Sergt.
Sheridan. (2nd row) Sergt. Keenan; Sergt. French; Col.-Sergt. Ambrose;
Capt. Fetherstonhaugh; Col. Cooper; Col.-Sergt. Guilfoyle: Sergt.
McNay; Sergt. Hobson; Pioneer-Sergt. Duncan. (3rd row) Sergt.
Moriarty; Sergt. Purcell; Col.-Sergt. Connell; Sergt. Beatty.]

The three companies of the 1st Battalion had been the greatest
sufferers. Being on the right, they were the last to retire; in fact,
some of the men did not get in till 5 p.m., while a few were taken
prisoners on the banks of the river.

[Illustration: Bringing down the Wounded.]

Amongst a host of others who showed their worth under the trying
circumstances of this unfortunate day, was Bugler Dunne, a small boy
who did his duty well, and had the good fortune to be received by Her
Majesty the Queen on his return home. His father was also in South
Africa, a Colour-Sergeant in the 5th Battalion. Isolated cases must
always receive undue prominence--it is the way of the world--but the
spirit of the men was quite remarkable throughout, and made officers
and N.C.O.'s proud to command and lead them. Instead of depressing
them, the reverse seemed to have a contrary effect, and merely
hardened their determination to succeed.




CHAPTER VI.

VENTER'S SPRUIT.

  'Now no chastening for the present seemeth to be joyous, but
  grievous.'--_Heb._ xii. 11.


The greater part of December 16th was spent in burying the dead. At
nightfall orders were received to strike camp, and the brigade marched
back to Frere, which was reached in the early morning of the 17th,
when we occupied our former camping-ground.

Another weary wait followed. Frere at the best of times is an
uninteresting spot, but it became absolutely repulsive as the grass
disappeared and mud and flies reigned supreme. Life in the camp was
monotonous, only slightly preferable to the long tours of outpost
duty, and a bathe in the river, varied by a walk round the lines,
formed the only amusement.

General Hart did not relax any of his precautions, and his command
still stood to arms every morning. The rest of the army assembled at
Frere seemed, so far as could be seen, to rely on the 5th Brigade, for
no other unit followed the latter's example.

Our listlessness was broken on January 6th, when the thunder of the
guns around Ladysmith was so distinct that it seemed as if Chieveley
must be attacked. Everybody soon learned that the Boers were making a
desperate attempt to capture the town, and there was naturally some
anxiety as to the result.

A few days afterwards, signs of another forward movement became
apparent. One cheerful omen was the arrival of the doctors, whose duty
it was to convey the wounded back to the base, and of a large body of
civilian stretcher-bearers. General Warren's Division, fresh from
England, marched in, and the second effort to relieve Ladysmith was
begun.

The 5th Brigade left Frere at daybreak on January 11th, and, covered
by the 'Royals,' took the Springfield road. It had been raining
heavily, and the road, never good, soon became execrable. The column
was followed by a long line of waggons carrying baggage, supplies,
ammunition, pontoons, &c. On arriving at Pretorius' Farm, the brigade
halted and pitched camp. The battalion found the outposts, which were
especially ordered to protect themselves by building 'sangars' or
digging trenches.

Meanwhile the apparently endless line of waggons had been blocked by a
bad drift below the camp, and the brigade was called upon to help. The
road was somewhat improved by throwing into the soft mud stones
obtained from a wall, and many waggons had to be hauled by ropes
through the spruit. For over forty-eight hours did that collection of
vehicles continue to cross and require help.

On Thursday, January 12th, the 4th Brigade and General Warren's
Division passed through the camp and went straight on to Springfield,
since the cavalry had ascertained that there were no Boers south of
the Tugela in that direction. The 5th Brigade followed on the
afternoon of the 15th, crossing the Little Tugela by a foot
trestle-bridge made of spars cut by the Engineers from trees on the
bank. As the battalion approached Springfield, the sound of
artillery-fire greeted it, and our shrapnel could be seen bursting
against a hill which was evidently on the left bank of the Tugela. It
was clear that the army was again in touch with the enemy, but nobody
knew what Sir Redvers Buller had decided upon, although everybody, of
course, dogmatised on what he ought to do.

On the afternoon of the 16th, orders were issued for the brigade to
march that night, although nothing was stated regarding its
destination. Vigorous operations were plainly intended, since the
force was to move as lightly as possible. No tents or blankets were
allowed, and the great-coats were carried by the regimental transport,
in which officers were permitted to pack twenty pounds of baggage. Six
days' rations were also taken.

The army moved from Springfield at dusk, leaving the camp standing in
charge of a few details (cooks, &c.), who had strict orders to light
fires and walk about, so that the vigilant burgher might not discover
that the army had slipped away. The general direction of the march was
north-west. It was a bright moonlight night, but the column moved
slowly, for the numerous waggons took up the centre of the road, while
the troops moved on the side. About midnight it began to rain, which
made everybody cold and uncomfortable, especially as halts were long
and frequent. It was not easy to see where the army was going,
although the Tugela could not be far off. Nobody knew the plan of
operations, which, however, evidently aimed at a surprise crossing of
the river, and it seemed as if the enemy must hear the noise of the
creaking transport and tramping men.

About 2 a.m. there came a halt on the top of a ridge, where General
Hart formed up his brigade. Each regiment deployed into line, and then
lay down one behind the other in the following order: Royal
Inniskilling Fusiliers, Connaught Rangers, Royal Dublin Fusiliers, and
Border Regiment. Fatigued by a long night-march, every one soon fell
asleep. Unfortunately, however, the slumbers of the brigade were
disturbed by an incident which shows how easily confusion can arise in
night operations. A horse from somewhere in front broke loose and
galloped over the veld, straight into the ranks of the sleeping
regiments. For a moment everything was in confusion, and a general
panic nearly took place. Luckily the first glimmer of dawn had come,
and the company officers soon regained control of their men, but it
might have been a different tale had darkness still prevailed.

When daylight came, it showed the army to be on the top of a hill
overlooking Trichardt's Drift. On the other side of the river the
ground rose to a long ridge flanked on the east by a steep mountain,
and on the west by a bastion-like hill. Nobody then knew the country,
but that mountain was Spion Kop, and the ridge lying so calmly in the
morning light was to be the scene of six days' continuous fighting. At
dawn of January 17th, however, the ridge, which the natives called
Tabanyama, seemed deserted, and not a Boer was to be seen.

It was now learnt that Sir Redvers Buller had divided his forces,
sending two brigades, under General Lyttelton, to Potgieter's Drift,
while the remainder of the army, under General Warren, was assembled
ready to cross the river at Trichardt's Drift.

The battalion breakfasted quietly, and then 'H' company was sent down
to the drift in order to help in the construction of a bridge. As the
company descended the steep slope, the artillery from the heights
began to shell a farm on the far side of the river, whence a Boer
patrol had been sniping. The Engineers had massed the pontoon waggons
round a farm by the drift, and were looking for a suitable point for
the bridge. The pontoons were launched, and by 11.30 a.m. the first
bridge was ready. The infantry immediately began to cross, but the
artillery and transport had to wait for a second bridge, which was not
completed until after dark.

The 5th Brigade marched down to the river at 2 p.m. and crossed. On
reaching the left bank the battalion deployed into line, with four or
five paces between the men, and slowly moved up the slope in support
of the widely-extended lines of the Lancashire Brigade. Except for an
occasional shot from the artillery at Potgieter's Drift, everything
was still and peaceful; although, as the army moved away from the
river, most of the officers expected to be greeted by the familiar
'pick-pock' of the enemy's mausers.

The brigade in front eventually halted on the top of a minor ridge,
some three thousand yards or more from the crest-line of Tabanyama,
and separated from it by open and gently-sloping ground. The Dublin
Fusiliers formed quarter-column immediately behind the Lancashire
Brigade, and prepared to bivouac. Many of the officers strolled higher
up in order to look at the country through their glasses. The main
crest-line was evidently occupied, for men could be seen busily
digging. It was somewhat trying to think that precious time was being
wasted, while the burghers were preparing a defensive position.

Our transport was still on the other side of the Tugela, and
consequently we had to do without blankets, great-coats, and kettles.
The officers' mess was saved by a subaltern, who succeeded in
procuring a Kaffir cooking-pot and some very tough fowls, which
Captain Hensley boiled with great skill. The night was unpleasant, for
khaki drill is but an inefficient protection against the cold and
heavy dew. The experience proved too much for Major Butterworth,
R.A.M.C., who had to go on the sick list soon afterwards. He had been
with the battalion since Ladysmith, and his coolness and devotion at
the battle of Colenso had made him popular with all ranks.

The next day, January 18th, was spent in idleness, and the different
corps remained in their bivouacs. There was nothing to do except watch
the Boers still digging on the crest-line, and the shells fired by the
guns of General Lyttelton, who was apparently making a reconnaissance.
The greater part of General Warren's artillery crossed to the left
bank and took up a position close to the battalion.

On the 19th the regiment took part in the movement which was
initiated with the evident purpose of turning the Boer right by the
Acton Holmes road. Leaving the artillery and the Lancashire Brigade on
the ridge, the remainder of the army descended into the plain, and
moved up the left bank of the Tugela. The column marched along the
base of the main ridge, and was carefully watched by the Boer patrols
from Bastion Hill.

After fording Venter's Spruit the battalion halted about 2 p.m. on
some rising ground, whence a good view of the surrounding country was
obtained. As there seemed every prospect of a long halt, the men began
to take off their boots and putties, in order to dry them, but they
had to put them on again hurriedly enough, since the guns suddenly
opened fire. At first everybody imagined that the Boers were attacking
the artillery and Lancashire Brigade. Soon, however, it was seen that
the latter were making a reconnaissance. Not much opportunity for
looking at the spectacle was afforded, since we received an order to
recross Venter's Spruit and bivouac. The movement by Acton Holmes had
been given up for some reason which was unknown, and it was not
difficult to see that the alternative was a frontal attack on the
position which everybody had watched being fortified.

The battalion halted close to Venter's Spruit, and had a piquet ('H'
company) on the Trichardt's Drift road. The transport succeeded in
reaching the brigade that night, and the men were thus able to have
their great-coats. Not much sleep was, however, allowed. At a very
early hour, long before daylight, on the 20th, the brigade was
aroused. Great-coats were again packed on the waggons, and then,
without breakfast or any opportunity of issuing rations, the battalion
fell in and marched off. Owing to darkness and the rough track by
which the column marched, progress was at first very slow. When the
feeble light of early dawn enabled the country to be seen, the
regiment was crossing a spruit near Fairview Farm, lying at the foot
of the ridge. It then ascended a small valley leading to Three Tree
Hill, where the Field Artillery had concentrated.

The latter soon afterwards opened the battle, and fired on the Boer
trenches, which stood out more prominently than usual on the crest of
the ridge. The enemy's artillery did not reply, although a vigorous
rifle-fire was directed on the skirmishers of the Lancashire Brigade.

The Connaught Rangers had been temporarily detached on escort duty,
and General Hart now moved his three remaining battalions to the left
in line of quarter-columns. It was a hot day, and the men, who had
eaten nothing that morning, suffered some discomfort from such a close
formation. The ground, too, was broken and covered with long grass and
scrub, so that it was no easy matter to satisfy the General's
injunctions in the matter of 'dressing.' The brigade moved in full
view of the enemy, and so compact a body of men must have been a great
temptation to the Boer gunners, who, however, were either not ready or
exercised much self-restraint. After scrambling through a remarkably
steep valley, the brigade halted in a gentle depression, where it was
safe from the random bullets that were falling near. A long pause
ensued, and the men were able to obtain some much-needed water.

It was past noon before the infantry, in this part of the field,
advanced in earnest. Then the York and Lancaster Regiment and
Lancashire Fusiliers were sent forward as the firing-line against the
centre of the Boer position, and were supported by the Borders and 2nd
Royal Dublin Fusiliers. The formation adopted by General Hart for the
support was two lines. The first line, which was two deep, consisted
of the right half-battalions of the two regiments, the Borders being
on the right, and was followed at a distance of about two hundred
yards by a similar line, composed of the left half-battalions.

On emerging from the depression where it had been resting, the support
came under rifle-fire. The range must, however, have been a long one,
and the casualties were few. The attack was moving astride of a spur
which ran from the Boer position to the Tugela, a little distance to
the west of Three Tree Hill. At first this spur was broad, forming
almost a plateau, but further on it narrowed, and consequently the
left of the two lines advanced up a narrow valley, which afforded
excellent cover.

Led by General Hart, the brigade advanced at a steady pace and, after
a time, closed up on the firing-line. It then halted, and from a
slight elevation opened fire in order to support the Lancashire
Regiments, who, having taken the enemy's advanced position, found that
some thousand yards of very open and almost-level ground lay between
them and the Boer trenches, which lined the northern edge of the
summit of the ridge. The attack could now only advance slowly, since
it was exposed to a cross-fire from both flanks. Hitherto it had only
faced rifle-fire, but about 1.45 p.m. the Boer guns, posted somewhere
near Spion Kop, came into action. They were able to rake the whole
assaulting line, and, in fact, many officers thought at first that the
shells were 'short' ones from our own artillery. The Boers on this
occasion managed to burst their shrapnel with some accuracy, and it
was fortunate that the attack could find good cover.

This artillery and the increased rifle-fire on the right flank caused
the line to swing round in that direction, but any further advance was
suspended by superior orders soon after 4.30 p.m. The Borders, who had
pushed ahead, were ordered back, and the other regiments took cover
among the rocks, and maintained a vigorous fire. The rattle of
musketry gradually died away as the light failed, until after
nightfall the battalion assembled behind a wall and bivouacked.

By great efforts the regimental transport had succeeded in getting
touch with the battalion, which was thus able to obtain rations. But
it was not until 8 p.m. that the men could get anything to eat.

Thus ended the fight of January 20th. It had cost the regiment one of
its most efficient officers, Captain Hensley, who was mortally
wounded.[4] Major English had been hit in the leg--he was back within
a fortnight--and of the rank and file four were killed and twenty
wounded--among the former being Lance-Sergeant Taylor, a most
excellent N.C.O. Although the opposing forces were so close, the night
passed quietly. With daylight (January 21st), however, the rifle-fire
at once broke out. The battalion had just managed to have a scratch
meal when orders were received to move to the support of the 2nd
Brigade, which was away to the left. General Hart ordered Colonel
Cooper to move by the straightest line, first down a ravine across a
spruit, and then over a hill. While climbing the latter, the battalion
was in full view of the enemy, who at once opened fire with guns and
rifles. Each company extended in succession, and doubled, so far as
possible, over the exposed ground. Once over the hill a region of
comparative safety was reached, and General Hart finally formed up his
command behind a rocky ridge overlooking the position held by the 2nd
Brigade. The latter were having a rifle duel with the Boer trenches
but did not advance. The 5th Brigade played a very passive part, and
spent the day behind the rocks. Bullets continually whistled overhead,
and the hostile artillery near Spion Kop burst an occasional shrapnel
along the position. Otherwise there was no excitement.

         [Footnote 4: Poor Hensley was not only one of the most
         popular officers in the regiment, but also one of the best
         and bravest. All his life he had been devoted to field
         sports, and his fame as a plucky big-game hunter and skilful
         shot was well known in many a Central Indian village and
         Cashmere valley. Educated at the Canadian Military College,
         he was a master of his profession, while the long months
         spent in Indian jungles had turned him into a handy man
         indeed. Wonderful and varied were the uses to which he could
         put an empty paraffin-tin or biscuit-box, and excellent were
         the stews he could produce out of a mess-tin. On one occasion
         in India a wounded panther was mauling one of his beaters.
         His rifle was empty, but without a moment's hesitation he
         dashed in, and drove the animal away by beating it over the
         head. Alas! poor Hensley, we could spare him ill, but, after
         all, we know he died the death he would have chosen.]

Towards evening, the regiment received orders to move some few hundred
yards to the right, and bivouac. Colonel Cooper directed the companies
to close in succession, and march from the rocks to the new position.
This movement almost escaped the notice of the Boer artillery, and it
was not until the last company ('H') moved that two shells were fired.
They fell to the right and in front of the leading fours, and did no
damage. The battalion assembled in a narrow amphitheatre just below
the southern crest, and at the head of a valley leading to Fairview
Farm. Although the bivouac could not be seen by the enemy, except from
Spion Kop, it was not altogether sheltered from fire, for every now
and then a bullet would clear the crest-line and strike the ground
below.

In this amphitheatre we perforce remained for three days, having a far
from pleasant time. From sunrise to sunset the rattle of musketry
practically never ceased, only at intervals the hum of the passing
bullets was drowned by the clang of bursting shrapnel. The Boer guns,
posted both directly in front and on the right flank, burst their
shells just over the crest, and fired intermittently all day. There
were four battalions crowded in the amphitheatre, and each one
occupied in turn the crest, whence an uninterrupted fire was directed
on the Boer trenches opposite. The enemy's marksmen had the range of
this crest-line, and it was a dangerous matter to stand up even for a
minute. Stone sangars were built and the companies relieved each other
by the men crawling up the slope. The enemy's artillery near Spion Kop
could rake the line of sangars, thus necessitating numerous
traverses. When not in the firing line, we lay behind the slope in
column, each company being protected by a parapet of earth or stone.
Immediately below the amphitheatre the ground fell steeply, forming a
ravine in which the cooks set up their field kitchens in comparative
security. It was characteristic of the British soldier that whereas
during the greater part of the day he crouched behind his cover, the
sight of a fatigue party with the kettles made him forget the shells
and bullets, and he dashed off for his food regardless of danger.

On Tuesday night (January 22nd) the proposed assault on Spion Kop was
announced, and every one hoped that a general advance would be the
result.

The morning of January 23rd dawned with a thick white mist, which hid
everything from view. It was our turn to occupy the ridge, and the
companies lay there for nearly an hour before the usual exchange of
rifle-fire began. No news of the capture of Spion Kop had reached the
amphitheatre, but the fact could be guessed from the absence of the
Boer guns in that direction. Only the artillery in front of the
battalion's position fired in the morning, and even that ceased during
the afternoon. The enemy was evidently concentrating the greater part
of his forces against Spion Kop, and parties of mounted burghers could
be seen moving from their extreme right. On Spion Kop hung the white
clouds of bursting shrapnel, and the stuttering sound of the pompom
scarcely ceased for a moment, but the 5th Brigade made no advance. The
companies behind the sangars fired hundreds of rounds at the Boer
trenches, while their comrades below ate and slept.

At dawn of the 25th, glasses and telescopes were turned on to the
summit of the mountain, and it was a bitter blow when the moving
figures there were seen to be Boers. It was not until late in the
forenoon, however, that the evacuation of Spion Kop was officially
communicated. But the renewal of the Boer artillery fire against the
crest-line had been a sufficiently eloquent announcement of the fact.

As there seemed no reason why the regiment should remain in the
amphitheatre when it was not required to man the sangars, Colonel
Cooper obtained permission that afternoon to move down the valley
below Bastion Hill. The new bivouac was more sheltered, although an
occasional Boer shell still fell near.

It was now evident that the second attempt to relieve Ladysmith had
failed, and that the army would have to recross the Tugela. On the
afternoon of the 25th, fatigue parties were sent by the battalion to
improve the track leading to Fairview Farm, and it was rumoured that
the retreat would take place that night. At 10.30 p.m. 'H' company was
sent to the farm, with orders to hold it during the retirement. But
the army did not move until Friday night, January 26th. At 10 p.m. on
that date, General Hart's command began to descend the valley in heavy
rain, which rendered the track extremely greasy.

Only a short distance had been covered when there was an outburst of
rifle-fire from the rearguard, which was still holding the sangars.
For a moment it seemed as if the Boers had anticipated the retreat and
were attacking. The battalion halted, but the firing soon ceased, and
the march was continued, the men stumbling down the track as quickly
as the many boulders would permit. At Fairview Farm the column halted
for a considerable period, in order to let the rearguard close up. By
this time every one was wet to the skin, and the enforced rest was
somewhat trying, owing to the cold.

However, after a wait of about an hour, the retirement was resumed.
The track was marked by orderlies and tins, but even with this help it
was difficult to find the way in the utter darkness. The surface of
the road, too, had become so slippery that falls were frequent.
Altogether, progress was painfully slow and the march a very
fatiguing one. It was past 4 a.m., January 27th, before the pontoon
bridge at Trichardt's Drift was reached. The column had another
prolonged wait here, and so tired were the men that many of them
dropped to the ground and slept in the mud. Early dawn had come when
the brigade recrossed the Tugela and toiled up the steep slope on the
other side. A Boer gun sent a parting shell just as the column reached
the summit.

It was a great relief to look back towards Tabanyama, where the
discarded biscuit tins were gleaming in the morning light, and say
good-bye to that long line of sangars and trenches. The men's spirits
were, moreover, cheered up by the sight of the 'Scotch' cart with the
kettles and rations. Breakfasts were cooked, and after a short rest
the brigade moved to the camping-ground selected for it. But it
arrived only to find that the position was within view and artillery
range of Spion Kop. So once more it had to trudge over the veld,
General Hart moving it in line of quarter-columns, and being as
particular about the 'dressing' as if he were on Laffan's Plain. His
command hardly appreciated this smartness at the time. But all were
finally rewarded by the arrival of the transport with tents and
baggage, and every one spent the night in comparative luxury.




CHAPTER VII.

VAAL KRANTZ.

  'The best laid schemes o' mice and men
           Gang aft agley.
  And lea'e us naught but grief and pain
           For promised joy.'

                              _Burns._


On January 30th we were reinforced by a draft of 400 men, principally
militia reservists, who were brought up by Captain Venour. They were a
welcome addition, being a physically fine body of men, and, although
their training was naturally not so good as that of their 'regular'
comrades, they proved equally brave and ready to follow their
officers.

The battalion shifted its camp on January 29th to Spearman's Hollow,
where it stayed a week. It was here that Sir Redvers Buller visited
every brigade in turn, and made his speech stating that the fighting
around Spion Kop had enabled him to discover the key to Ladysmith. He
had earned the gratitude of the men by putting them on extra rations,
and was always a warm favourite with the rank and file, who love a
brave man and instinctively know one.

On February 2nd the regiment left Spearman's Hollow for Spearman's
Hill, and, on the afternoon of Sunday, February 4th, marched with the
rest of the brigade towards Potgieter's Drift. The trek was a short
one, and at 6 p.m. we bivouacked behind Swaartz Kop. At nightfall the
officers were assembled and informed of the proposed operations for
the next day. The idea was to make a feint attack on Brakfontein and
then assault Vaal Krantz, the capture of which, it was thought, would
break the enemy's line.

We rose at dawn on the 5th, had a comfortable breakfast, and only
moved off about 7 a.m., just as the heavy artillery on Mount Alice and
Swaartz Kop began the fight by shelling Brakfontein. The hills around
rolled with the thunder of the guns, while the faint echoes of the
lyddite explosions on the distant ridges formed a piano accompaniment.
With this music in its ears, the battalion marched through the gap
between Mount Alice and Swaartz Kop by the road leading to Potgieter's
Drift. There was a short halt made at the gap, from which a splendid
view of the battlefield was obtainable. Immediately below stretched
the silver line of the Tugela, with all its many loops and twistings
visible. Beyond came a small brown ridge, which had evidently been
held by our troops, since a few biscuit-tins glistened on the near
slope. Further away was the background formed by the Boer position,
extending in a gigantic curve from Spion Kop on the spectator's left
to the lofty mass of Doorn Kloof on his right, the centre being formed
by Brakfontein and Vaal Krantz, over both of which heavy columns of
smoke were hanging. The Lancashire Brigade had commenced the feint
attack, and its extended lines could be plainly seen as they advanced
slowly in succession, while behind them the batteries of field
artillery had unlimbered on the plain, and were already shelling the
Boer trenches.

After a short pause the regiment began to descend the hill. The 5th
Brigade was following the 4th, both of them marching in 'fours.'
Before reaching the drift, the head of the column wheeled to the right
and proceeded along the narrow plain between the Tugela and Swaartz
Kop. The sight of that long winding line must have been a great
temptation to the Boer gunners, but they remained silent. Not even a
rifle had spoken. It was only when the Lancashire Brigade began to
retire that the enemy disclosed himself. Then Brakfontein spluttered
with musketry, and the Boer artillery vented its wrath on the
batteries dotted over the plain. But both our infantry and gunners
seemed to treat the fusillade with contempt. The former marched
back without apparently quickening their pace, and the latter,
limbering up, trotted off to support the attack on Vaal Krantz. This
hill was being literally covered with shells, and soon had the
appearance of a smoking volcano.

[Illustration: Casualties at Tugela Heights.

  Second Lieut. LANE. _Wounded at Hart's Hill._
  Lieut. J. MCD. HASKARD. _Wounded at Pieter's Hill._
  Second Lieut. BRADFORD. _Wounded at Pieter's Hill._
  Capt. A. V. HILL (_1st Battalion, attached_). _Wounded at Pieter's
    Hill._
  Second Lieut. BRODHURST HILL (_1st Battalion, attached_). _Wounded
    at Pieter's Hill._]

About 1 p.m. the Durham Light Infantry filed over the pontoon under
Swaartz Kop, and extended for the attack. At the same time we were
moved to a position below the southern end of the Kop in order to
cover by long-range rifle-fire the right of the 4th Brigade. 'B'
company fired a few volleys at some invisible snipers on the slopes of
Doorn Kloof, but with this exception we did not come into action.

Watched by the whole army the Durhams advanced against Vaal Krantz,
which they took about 4 p.m. amidst the cheers of the onlookers. But
with this success the operations practically ended for the day.

The battalion remained all the afternoon in the same position, and
then finally bivouacked there, having luckily succeeded in
communicating with the transport, so that the men had blankets. Its
outposts were pushed well round the southern slopes of Swaartz Kop,
thus overlooking the Tugela. A reconnoitring patrol was fired on from
the left bank, but otherwise the night passed without incident.

We did not move on the 6th, and had practically nothing to do. The
artillery on both sides fired continually, although the damage done
must have been very small in proportion to the noise and expenditure
of ammunition.

Every one watched with special interest a duel between our heavy
artillery and a large Boer gun which had suddenly been unmasked on
Doorn Kloof. This gun fired black powder, and its discharge could be
plainly seen, but it was apparently run up for every round behind a
parapet. It displayed absolute impartiality in its attentions. One
round would be directed against the infantry on Vaal Krantz, another
covered with dust a field battery on the plain, a third just missed
the battalion, while a fourth shell would crash among the trees on
Swaartz Kop. All our heavy guns had a try at silencing it, and their
efforts sometimes met with partial success. The Boer gun would cease
firing for a time, but it always re-appeared when least expected.
Towards the evening it became quite lively and put a shell through the
pontoon bridge.

The night of February 6th-7th was spent in comparative peace, although
the Boer artillery somewhat spoiled the first part of the night by
shelling Vaal Krantz. February 7th was a repetition of the 6th, except
that the gun on Doorn Kloof paid slightly more attention to our
position. The Colonel found it necessary to post a man on the
look-out, whose duty it was, on seeing the white puff of smoke, to
blow a whistle, whereupon everybody sought the shelter of the nearest
and largest boulder. But although, when the huge shell burst, the air
seemed unpleasantly full of whizzing iron fragments, no damage was
done, and the gun merely mitigated, to some extent, the monotony of
idleness.

By this time it was clear that Sir Redvers Buller did not intend to
press the attack home, and no one was surprised to find the army in
retreat on the morning of the 8th. The battalion acted as rearguard
and marched back between the river and Swaartz Kop in widely extended
lines. The Boer guns on Doorn Kloof, the shoulder of Spion Kop, and
Brakfontein shelled us on our way, and one man of the rear company
('H') was killed, this being our only casualty between February 5th
and 8th. The heavy artillery on Mount Alice covered the retreat and
prevented the enemy's guns from being too attentive.

The 5th Brigade halted at Springfield, and two days later went on to
Pretorius' Farm. On the 18th it made a march of fourteen miles to the
Blaukranz River, starting about 3.30 a.m. The day was hot, and as
there was no water on the route the newly-joined militia reservists
suffered considerably. After a rest of two days the brigade moved to
a camp near Gun Hill at Chieveley, where the naval six-inch gun was in
position.

The rest of the army was now engaged in the operations against Cingolo
and Hlangwane, and the battalion occupied itself in guarding
Chieveley, in beginning the construction of a railway to Hussar Hill,
and in convoying ammunition to the latter place. This was a somewhat
trying task, as during part of the way the convoy became the object of
many a Boer shell. The operations against Cingolo and Hlangwane proved
successful, and these positions were captured on the 19th. The next
day General Hart took the regiment on a reconnaissance towards
Colenso. It advanced cautiously on the west of the railway in column
of extended companies. The village was found unoccupied, but a party
of Boers, holding the horseshoe ridge on the left bank of the Tugela
opened a vigorous fire. The leading companies at once doubled forward
and lined the right bank, whence they answered the Boer marksmen. The
left half-battalion remained in support behind the village. A
detachment of Thorneycroft's Mounted Infantry appeared on the scene,
and having forded the Tugela above the road bridge, turned the Boers
out of their position. Later on in the afternoon a train steamed into
Colenso station from Chieveley, and took us back just before dusk.

At 6 a.m. on February 21st, the Connaught Rangers and the Dublin
Fusiliers went by train to Colenso, where they were joined by a
battery. The horseshoe ridge on the left bank was being held by a
detachment of Thorneycroft's Mounted Infantry, but General Hart was
desirous of crossing the river with at least part of his force. For
this purpose he had brought on the train a boat, which was promptly
launched. As, however, the boat was small, and hardly capable of
holding more than four men, the General gave orders for the
construction of a raft. After some trouble this was ready by 4 p.m.,
and some two hours later about seven companies of the Connaught
Rangers had succeeded in reaching the left bank.

General Hart now received an order to cross early next morning, with
three battalions of his brigade, the pontoon bridge, which had been
constructed under Hlangwane. The regiment bivouacked in Colenso, and
at 5 a.m. on February 22nd marched down the right bank and crossed the
bridge. One company had been sent back to Chieveley for the purpose of
striking the camp, and with the transport rejoined the battalion about
7 a.m., after the latter had crossed the bridge and taken up a
position on the western side of the horseshoe ridge.

Here it stayed the whole day, all ranks passing the time in examining
the Boer trenches, and picking up more or less worthless loot. Heavy
fighting was taking place in front, but only an occasional shell fell
near the ridge.




CHAPTER VIII.

HART'S AND PIETER'S HILLS--THE RELIEF OF LADYSMITH.

               'But since I knew
  No rock so hard but that a little wave
  May beat admission in a thousand years,
  I re-commenced.'

                              _Tennyson._


Late on February 22nd, orders were issued for the brigade[5] to be
ready to move at an early hour next morning. Breakfasts were eaten
before 4 a.m., and the battalion fell in at about 4.15 on February
23rd. The brigade was to move from the left to the right of the army,
and it was probably the intention of the Headquarter Staff for the
march to take place during darkness. But there was a hitch in the
distribution of biscuits, and it was already broad daylight when we
started.

         [Footnote 5: The Borders had been left behind at Chieveley.
         In their place General Hart received half a battalion of the
         newly-raised Imperial Light Infantry.]

General Hart moved his command in column of route, and the long line
soon attracted the notice of the enemy's artillery. It was somewhat
trying to the nerves to hear the whistle of a shell coming nearer and
nearer, until finally it struck the ground within a few yards of the
column. Luckily, the Boers were either using common shell or their
shrapnel did not burst, and the battalion had no casualties. Finally
the railway was reached, and the brigade turned to the left, each
battalion forming column of companies in succession. A halt was made
close to the railway line and a short distance to the south of the
viaduct over the Onderbrook Spruit. But as a few shells fell
dangerously near, and showed that the enemy could still see the
brigade, it was moved to the left behind a rocky ridge. The battalion
stayed here for the rest of the morning. The Boer gunners fired
frequently at the ridge, but the slope of the ground saved us from any
losses. Sir Redvers Buller and his staff rode up about mid-day in
order to explain to General Hart what was required of him. This was
the capture of the hill known as Inniskilling, or Hart's Hill. It
could be plainly seen from the summit of the ridge behind which we
lay, and all officers and section commanders were called up in order
to have a look at it. They were told that it formed the extreme left
of the Boer position, and that its capture meant the relief of
Ladysmith. General Hart desired all officers to inform their men of
the necessity for a resolute assault. Our heavy artillery on the right
bank of the Tugela now began to shell the hill, which was quickly
covered by the smoke and dust of the lyddite explosions.

Meanwhile, the 2nd Brigade was preparing the way by an assault on a
ridge some 1000 yards to the front. They had a tough fight, and their
wounded were soon being brought down the railway in trucks and
stretchers.

The afternoon was well advanced when the 5th Brigade moved to the
attack. The hill to be assaulted lay some 3000 yards to the north-east
of the ridge which had been sheltering us, and the nature of the
intervening ground forbade a direct advance, which would dangerously
expose the left flank. It was necessary to hug the river-bank until a
position from which a direct attack became possible was reached.

The brigade at first moved along the railway line in file in the
following order: Royal Inniskilling Fusiliers, Connaught Rangers,
Royal Dublin Fusiliers, and Imperial Light Infantry. The battalion
moved with the left in front. A brigade in file takes up a
considerable space, and by the time the regiment could start, a heavy
outburst of firing showed that the Inniskilling Fusiliers were already
engaged.

The advance along the railway line, through a cutting and over the
Onderbrook Spruit, was very slow, since checks were frequent. The Boer
artillery missed this favourable opportunity of shelling their foes,
luckily for the latter. After crossing Onderbrook Spruit, the column
turned to the right and crept along the river. The enemy were sweeping
the bank with pompoms and a heavy rifle-fire, but by crouching under
the bank the column obtained good cover for the greater part of the
way. But every now and then there came an exposed bit of ground over
which it was necessary to double, and so narrow was the track that men
had often to jump over the wounded or killed.

The Langverwacht Spruit had to be crossed by the railway bridge. As
the latter was in full view of the enemy and was being raked by pompom
shells and bullets, it proved a great delay to the progress of the
column. It was only possible to cross at more or less long intervals.
Each man was forced to run the gauntlet by himself, and had to double
over as hard as he could. Beyond the bridge complete cover was
obtained except for a small stretch of ground by the Boer bridge.
Below the latter, the river ran between high hills, and the column was
therefore screened from view.

By the time that the leading company of the battalion had cleared
'Pompom' bridge, the Inniskilling Fusiliers were advancing against the
Boer position on Hart's Hill. It was about 5 p.m., and the General
could not wait until his brigade had concentrated, but sent his troops
forward as they arrived. The left half-battalion of the Royal Dublin
Fusiliers formed up near a deserted Boer bivouac overlooking the
river, and then, without stopping for the right half, advanced to
where General Hart was standing.

Lieutenant-Colonel Sitwell was in command of the left half-battalion,
and in a short time he was sent for by the General, who told him to
advance and help the Inniskilling Fusiliers to capture the hill.

The leading company ('H') was directed to extend to six paces and move
forward, the remaining companies ('G,' 'F,' and 'E') following at a
distance of 100 yards. No sooner had 'H' company cleared the crest of
the hill on which General Hart was standing, than it came under a
heavy rifle-fire, principally from the direction of Railway Hill.
Lieutenant Lane fell badly wounded--shot clean through the head from
one side to another, a wound from which he made a marvellous
recovery--and three or four men were hit. The company received the
order to double, no easy task down a steep slope strewn with rocks and
boulders. The railway line at the bottom of the slope was crossed, and
the opposite side of the valley, which was dotted with small trees,
ascended. The company had now caught up the lines of the Connaught
Rangers, and all climbed up the hill, the crest of which had been
gained by the Inniskilling Fusiliers. Although the attacking infantry
could not be seen from the Boers on Hart's or Railway Hill, they were
still exposed to an enfilade fire from the left.

On arriving with 'H' company at the top of the hill,
Lieutenant-Colonel Sitwell found the Inniskilling Fusiliers lying
along the crest-line and facing the Boer trenches, which ran at about
three hundred yards distance on the far side of the flat plateau. The
Inniskillings had already suffered serious casualties, but, on
Lieutenant-Colonel Sitwell stating that he had been ordered to charge,
claimed the right of leading the assault. To this Colonel Sitwell
agreed, but it was decided to wait until the remaining companies of
the left half-battalion of the Royal Dublin Fusiliers were up.
Meanwhile our guns and the cavalry maxims on the right bank of the
Tugela were directing against the enemy's trenches a stream of bullets
and shrapnel shells, the latter seeming to burst immediately over the
infantry.

[Illustration: Casualties at Tugela Heights (_continued_).

  Capt. A. HENSLEY. _Killed at Venter's Spruit._
  Lieut.-colonel SITWELL. _Killed at Hart's Hill._
  Capt. MAITLAND. (_Gordon Highlanders, attached_) _Killed at
    Hart's Hill._
  Major F. P. ENGLISH. _Wounded at Venter's Spruit and Zuikerbosch._
  Second Lieut. DENNIS. _Wounded at Hart's Hill. Died of Enteric at
    Aliwal North._]

The sun had set, and the light was already failing by the time that
the four companies of the left half-battalion had come up, principally
on the left of the Inniskilling Fusiliers. Then the signal to charge
was given, and the whole line rose up, and with a yell dashed forward.
But it was met by a murderous fire. In the gathering darkness the Boer
trenches quivered with the rifle-flashes, and the bullets struck out
sparks as they hit the rocks. At such a short range the enemy's
marksmen could hardly miss, and the line of charging infantry was
almost mowed down. The assault was checked, and the attackers flung
themselves on the ground and sought what little cover there was.

[Illustration: After the Fight.]

Luckily night intervened, and, although the Boers never for a moment
ceased their fire, the survivors of that charge managed to creep back
to the crest. Here Colonel Brooke, of the Connaught Rangers, and
Lieutenant-Colonel Sitwell collected them, and took steps to guard
against a counter-attack. A low stone wall was built below the crest,
and behind this the night was spent.

It was very dark, and the ground, covered with boulders, most
difficult to move over. Wounded men lay all over the hill, but there
were no doctors, no stretcher-bearers, and no water. It was impossible
to help or to move them. Their groans, combined with the intermittent
rifle-fire, made sleep difficult.

We had three officers wounded (Lieutenants Lane, Hill, and Dennis),
and some twenty casualties. Lieutenant Hill was again hit as he lay,
and subsequently lost his foot in consequence.

The infantry crouching behind the stone wall were unable to
communicate with the rest of the army. At dawn, however, Major
McGrigor, the Brigade-Major, came up to the line and told Colonel
Brooke that General Hart wished him to hold on to his position, to
which reinforcements would be sent. Colonel Brooke explained that food
and water would have to be sent also, and, above all, that his left
must be protected. Having promised to do what he could, Major McGrigor
returned to his General. With daylight the battle recommenced. The
Boers, from their trenches on Hart's and Railway Hills, kept up a
vigorous rifle-fire, and were answered as far as possible by the men
of the 5th Brigade behind the wall. Our artillery shelled Hart's Hill,
and many of their shrapnel which burst short hit the unlucky wounded
who were still lying on the plateau.

But the Boers were not content to remain on the defensive. Gradually
their skirmishers worked round the left of the hill, moving by the
dongas which ran down to the railway line, and were able to fire up
into the rear of the defenders of the wall. Part of the latter were
extended at right angles to the wall, and endeavoured to drive off the
enemy. But the Boers had excellent cover, whereas the infantry crowded
together on the hill presented an easy target. Casualties became
numerous. The morning wore on, and there were no signs of the promised
reinforcements or of the much-needed water and food. It seemed useless
to stay on the hill, and about 8 a.m. Colonel Brooke gave the order
to retire. As the men rose to their feet and ran down the hill, the
rattle of the Boer musketry increased in volume, and the bullets
whistled among the retreating soldiers. Lieut.-Colonel Sitwell was
killed as he descended the slope, and Captain Maitland, of the Gordon
Highlanders, who had been in command of 'G' company since November,
was mortally wounded almost at the same time. Luckily, the distance
was not very great, and once over the railway line the stream of
bullets ceased.

[Illustration: The Grave of Colonel Sitwell and Captain Maitland,
Gordon Highlanders (attached), near Railway at Pieter's Hill.]

Lieut.-Colonel Sitwell's loss was severely felt. Though he had only
recently joined us, he had given numerous proofs of his soldierly
ability. He had the benefit of considerable previous war service, and
had he lived would doubtless have risen to high rank. Captain
Maitland, Gordon Highlanders, had been unable to join his regiment in
Ladysmith, and had been attached to the battalion since Estcourt. Over
and over again he had proved himself to be a most gallant soldier, and
had endeared himself to all his temporary comrades (see Appendix). He
commanded 'G' company, which was most unfortunate in respect of its
commanders, having no less than six during the war. Colour-Sergeant
Connell, however, than whom no braver man lives, was with it
throughout.

As the retiring infantry climbed up the slope of Hart's Hollow they
met the advancing lines of the 4th Brigade, who had been sent to
reinforce the 5th. The latter quickly re-formed--there were not many
of the Inniskilling Fusiliers left to re-form--and were able to obtain
food after a fast of nearly twenty-four hours.

The casualties of the left half-battalion amounted to two officers
killed and three wounded, and eleven killed and fifty-six wounded of
the rank and file.[6]

         [Footnote 6: There were, of course, many narrow escapes, but
         none narrower than that of Major Romer, whose modesty forbids
         him to allude to it. His helmet was shot through by a bullet
         which actually parted his hair in its passage, a feat never
         before accomplished.--A. E. M.]

The right half-battalion, under Major English, had, during the assault
of Hart's Hill, watched the right flank towards Pieter's Hill. General
Hart proposed that they should attack the Boers in that quarter, but
Colonel Cooper, who was with the right half-battalion, pointed out
that the day was too far advanced. The right half-battalion spent the
night of the 23rd-24th February among the rocks on the hill whence
General Hart had directed the attack. About 8 a.m. on February 24th,
'B' company was sent to drive off small parties of the enemy who had
crept down the dongas and reached the railway on the left. This
company came under a severe fire, and Lieutenant Brodhurst Hill was
wounded in the leg, but the Boers were driven back. The 24th was spent
in a ceaseless rifle-duel with the enemy, who had brought a gun to
bear on the hill. During the afternoon, preparations were made for a
fresh attack on Hart's Hill, to be undertaken by Colonel Cooper with
two battalions, while General Hart, with the remainder of the force
at hand, assaulted Railway Hill. The attack was, however, postponed.

The enemy evidently feared another assault, for in the course of the
night of February 24th-25th, they opened a vigorous fire, which
disturbed the slumbers of General Hart's force, and created some
excitement.

During all this time the unlucky wounded, who had been hit on the
23rd, had been left lying in front of the Boer trenches. It was
impossible to help them, since all attempts in that direction had been
frustrated by the enemy. But on the morning of Sunday, February 25th,
a partial armistice was agreed upon in order to bring in the wounded
and to bury the dead. The armistice ended at 6 p.m., and both sides
commenced firing immediately afterwards.

[Illustration: Pieter's Hill. February 27th, 1900.]

Meanwhile, Sir Redvers Buller had evolved a new plan of operations,
and decided to attack with his combined force the three
hills--Pieter's, Railway, and Hart's. For this purpose the greater
part of the artillery was brought from the left bank and concentrated
on the right bank, opposite the points to be assaulted. It was in
position by the 26th, and began a slow bombardment of the Boer
trenches. During the night, the pontoon bridge under Hlangwane was
dismantled, and carried down to a point below the Boer bridge, where
it was relaid, an operation which was not concluded until 10 a.m. on
the 27th.

On the day before, the Dublin Fusiliers had been ordered to join
temporarily General Barton's Brigade. It left its position among the
rocks of Hart's Hollow about 7 a.m. on February 27th, and, moving down
the hill through the deserted Boer laager, halted by the pontoon
bridge. Here it was joined soon after 9 a.m. by the Irish and Scots
Fusiliers, and came under the command of General Barton.

[Illustration: Pontoon Bridge, River Tugela. February 28th, 1900.]

The battalion followed the Scots Fusiliers, and moved along the left
bank of the Tugela at the foot of a steep ridge, being covered by
infantry and maxim fire from the right bank.

After a march of two miles, and at the point where the Klip River
joins the Tugela, the 6th Brigade turned to its left and prepared to
attack the Boer position, which, lying some two miles from the river,
stretched from the ridges north of Eagle's Nest to the various kopjes
constituting Pieter's Hill. General Barton directed the Royal Irish
Fusiliers to assault the western end of Pieter's Hill and the Scots
Fusiliers the eastern, while the 2nd Royal Dublin Fusiliers formed the
reserve.

The assault was successful, and the greater part of Pieter's Hill fell
into our hands, but the Boers still held a kopje to the north of the
hill, and maintained a heavy fire. General Barton, anxious to complete
his victory, directed three companies of the battalion and one company
of the Scots Fusiliers to advance against the kopje. 'B,' 'C,' and 'H'
were the three companies selected, the first named being on the right
and the latter on the left, connecting with the Scots Fusiliers.
Guided by Captain MacBean, Royal Dublin Fusiliers, Brigade-Major 6th
Brigade, the detachment advanced about 2.30 p.m., and came at once
under a heavy rifle and pompom fire. The companies pushed forward,
however, by successive rushes until they reached a donga some three
hundred yards from the kopje. Here further progress was checked for a
time, and General Barton ordered forward three companies of the Royal
Irish Fusiliers. The latter came up about 5.30 p.m., and, supported by
the covering fire of 'B,' 'C,' and 'H' companies, rushed the left of
the hill, when the above-mentioned companies of the battalion, led by
Captain Venour, assaulted the right. The attack was successful, and
the kopje was captured.

During the advance Lieutenants Haskard and Bradford, in command of 'C'
and 'H' companies, were wounded, and the engagement cost the regiment
nine killed and forty-three wounded. 'D' company, under Lieutenant
Ely, towards the close of the afternoon came up on the left of 'H'
company, in order to fill the gap between the latter and the Scots
Fusiliers.

[Illustration: 2nd Royal Dublin Fusiliers, heading Relief Troops,
marching into Ladysmith, March, 1900.]

The three companies which had made their attack on the kopje spent the
night on the captured position. Captain Venour, who was the senior
officer present, re-formed the men of the Irish and Dublin Fusiliers,
and constructed sangars, with a view of warding off a Boer
counter-attack. In the meantime 'A,' 'E,' 'F,' and 'G' companies--with
whom was Colonel Cooper--were directed to the right, in order to guard
the flank of the brigade against the Eagle's Nest position. These
companies gained about 2 p.m. a ridge opposite the Eagle's Nest, and
overlooking the extensive plain which stretches up to Bulwana
Mountain. The enemy opened a well-aimed fire on this ridge, and also
brought into action a gun which was placed on the shoulder to the
north of the Nest. As the right of the four companies was thrown back
towards the Tugela, this Boer gun could nearly enfilade part of the
line. Sangars were built, however, and there were not more than three
or four casualties in this part of the field. The firing ceased at
dusk, but otherwise the night was unpleasant, for it rained, and the
waggons could not get near the fighting line, so that the men had to
do without their great-coats.

Before daybreak on February 28th the battalion collected its scattered
companies and was ready for action. There was no reliable news of what
had happened on other parts of the field during the 27th, and the full
extent of the victory was still unknown. When daylight came it was
evident that the Boers had evacuated the Eagle's Nest, and small
parties of them could be seen retiring, while the tents of their
laager under Bulwana were gradually diminishing. But even then few
could believe that the relief of Ladysmith was practically
accomplished.

[Illustration: General Sir Redvers Buller, V.C., entering Ladysmith.]

Before mid-day an order came, directing the Dublin Fusiliers to move
after dinner and join the 11th Brigade, the position of which was not
indicated. Major English rode on ahead in order to discover its
whereabouts, but by the time he found it, the battalion had gone two
miles out of its way. The 11th Brigade was joined about 4 p.m., and
the regiment bivouacked between Hart's and Railway Hills. A heavy
thunderstorm burst over the country soon after 8 p.m., and made
everybody somewhat miserable, although the officers had been cheered
by the arrival of the invaluable Corporal Tierney, who, as usual,
succeeded in giving them food.

The services of this N.C.O. (now Mess-Sergeant) will never be
forgotten by the regiment, as long as an officer who was present with
it in South Africa remains in it. Over and over again he brought up
food to the officers under heavy fire, and through those desperate
thunderstorms. Always cheery, ever ready, there he was in his
shirt-sleeves, with a drink and a snack, just as one had resigned
oneself to going without anything. A word must also be said in praise
of our French _chef_, M. Burst, who cooked for the officer's mess
throughout, and proved himself on all occasions a brave man.

[Illustration: The Dublins are coming--Ladysmith.]

After breakfast on March 1st, the 11th Brigade advanced along the
railway towards Ladysmith. It was thought that the Boers would be
holding Bulwana, and the brigade had orders to attack the hill. But it
was soon learnt that the enemy had retired, and we eventually reached
Nelthorpe Station about mid-day and bivouacked. Major English and
Captain Venour took the opportunity of riding into Ladysmith.

March 2nd was spent at Nelthorpe. On the 3rd, Sir Redvers Buller's
army entered Ladysmith, and the honour of leading the army fell to the
2nd Battalion Royal Dublin Fusiliers--an honour which nobody grudged
them, on account of the constant fighting they had taken part in since
the beginning of the war, and the heavy casualties they had suffered.
The route was by the railway bridge, and the streets of the little
town were lined by the garrison, who, emaciated but clean, presented a
startling contrast to their war-stained relievers.

[Illustration: Sir George White watching Relief Force entering
Ladysmith.]

The entry into Ladysmith, with its enthusiasm and meeting of old
friends, formed a fitting ending to the battalion's Natal campaign.
Hardly any other unit in the army had suffered such casualties. Only
five company officers marched through Ladysmith with it. The others
had been killed, wounded, or disabled.




CHAPTER IX.

THE SIEGE OF LADYSMITH.

  'I am shut up.'--_Ps._ lxxxviii. 8 and _Jer._ xxxvi. 5.


_Chronicle of the part taken by the detachment 2nd Battalion Royal
Dublin Fusiliers in the Siege of Ladysmith from November 1st, 1899, to
February 28th, 1900._ _By_ LIEUT. L. F. RENNY, _2nd Batt. Royal Dublin
Fusiliers_.


The detachment which was left behind in Ladysmith when the battalion
was ordered to Colenso consisted of two officers, three
non-commissioned officers and fifty-one men. The latter were made up
by a section of 'G' company which was left on piquet because they
could not be relieved in time, and the men of the regimental
transport, which had been left behind owing to there being no facility
for sending the waggons and animals by train with the battalion.

The morning after the departure of the latter I was ordered by the
D.A.A.G. of the divisional troops to proceed to the various camps in
Section A, and find convenient space for the transport waggons. I
found the necessary ground in rear of the camp of the 1st Battalion
Gloucester Regiment, behind the railway cutting leading to the Orange
Free State Junction. Here we were joined in the afternoon by
Lieutenant H. W. Higginson, who took command, and the section of 'G'
company, when the Gloucesters helped us in every way, and made us as
comfortable as they possibly could. All that day we were left in
comparative peace, there being no firing on either side; but the next
morning about 5 a.m. the Boers opened with 'Long Tom' from Pepworth
Hill, and commenced a duel of some hour's duration with our naval 4·7,
which was placed on Junction Hill. They also kept up a continual
cannonade with their long-range twelve-pounders, but did little or no
damage, as they had not yet discovered the exact location of our
camps.

For the next three or four days we remained in the Gloucester's camp
and aided in starting the trenches which eventually formed the fort
known as 'Tunnel Hill.' This was by no means pleasant work, as it was
carried out under fire, the enemy being very quick at spotting our
working parties and remarkably so at obtaining our range. We used to
watch with great interest the duel every morning between the two big
guns. Once the Boers hoisted a large white flag over their epaulement
and proceeded to repair some small damage to their gun--they have very
weird ideas about the white flag.

On November 7th our detachment was suddenly ordered to proceed to
'Bell's Spruit,' and form the guard there. I was ordered to hand over
our transport to the Army Service Corps, so we took away the majority
of the men and brought the strength of our piquet up to thirty-one
men; the transport was sent to the railway station yard for the use of
the Army Service Corps, where it remained throughout the siege. We
were stationed at the mouth of the spruit just where it runs through
the ridge opposite the cemetery. Our fortifications consisted of a
thick wall with sandbag loopholes running right across the spruit;
about fifty yards in front were strips of high and low wire
entanglement, making it practically impossible for the enemy to rush
the post at night. By night we had to man two sangars placed on the
hills on each side of the spruit. I know nothing more productive of
bad language than visiting the sentries on those hills in the dark,
scrambling over the hugest boulders up a hill like the side of a
house. We were not very comfortable at first, there being absolutely
no shelter from sun or rain, but after about a week we managed to
obtain a couple of railway tarpaulins, and rigged up shelters on the
sides of the spruit. We were all very lucky in not getting hit, as
the enemy had a nasty habit of bursting shrapnel over the place and
sending common shell on to the crests, which produced a shower of
rocks, splinters and stones; but although we were in the spruit for
seven weeks with absolutely no cover, not a man in the detachment was
hit. During our stay in the spruit our rations were exceptionally
good, as we got extras in the way of bacon, jam, chocolate, &c.

The night-work at this time was very hard, as everybody not actually
on outpost duty had to work at the trenches from 6.30 in the evening
till 3 a.m. the next morning. Sleep being impossible in the day-time
owing to the heat and a plague of flies, this continual night-work
told on the men severely. On November 9th the enemy made a feeble
attempt at capturing the place, and came on in considerable numbers
against Observation Hill, but were easily repulsed. On the night of
December 7th-8th an attack was made on Gun Hill, where the Boers had a
'Long Tom' and a five-inch howitzer, besides one or two small guns.
These guns had been annoying us very greatly for the past three weeks,
and we were all delighted in the early morning when we heard the
attack had been successful, and the guns blown up. We none of us knew
anything about this affair till it was over. I was visiting our posts
about 2.30 a.m. when I saw two large flashes on Gun Hill; on listening
I could not hear any shells travelling or bursting, so concluded the
enemy were amusing themselves by firing blank charges. It was not till
we saw our column returning at dawn that we solved the problem. We
found the spruit very unpleasant in wet weather, as the water used to
come down like a mountain torrent and wash away bits of our wall and
shelters; after wet nights we used to spend our time in digging our
belongings out of the sand, having spent the night sitting on the
rocks.

About December 18th, after the failure of General Buller's first
attempt to relieve us, there was a general interchange of posts
amongst the troops of our section, and the detachment received orders
to proceed to the Newcastle Road examining guard. We were all heartily
sick of the spruit, and glad of the change. It was about this time
that our rations began to be diminished, and we had completely run out
of all extras. The post of the examining guard was on the road just
inside the ridge which formed our general line of defence, but by
night we moved out as a piquet about half a mile on to the veld into a
spruit which ran under the Harrismith line, whence we patrolled out to
Brooke's Farm, and the surrounding country. I think this was the worst
post we had throughout the siege, as we came in for a long spell of
wet weather, and night after night had to lie out on the open veld
from 8 p.m. till 4 a.m., wet to the skin and miserably cold. The
duties on this post came very hard on our men, as we had to find a
double and single sentry by day, so that they never got a night in
bed, and only about one day in three off duty.

On Christmas Eve the men came into possession of a fine pig, so that
we all had pork for our Christmas dinner, a great change from eternal
'trek ox,' but unfortunately nothing stronger to drink than tea. I'm
sure it was the first Christmas any of us had spent in such an
uncongenial way.

On January 6th the enemy made their desperate attack on Waggon Hill
and Caesar's Camp. They seem to have completely surprised our
outposts, as they succeeded in crawling up the hill in the dark, and
the fighting commenced at 3 a.m. The cannonade all day was something
tremendous, 'Long Tom' firing 125 rounds. They kept us pretty busy on
our side of the defences as well, but never developed any serious
attack. Whilst on this post we were subjected to a continuous and
daily course of sniping, the enemy getting on the kopjes behind
Brooke's Farm, and firing all day at a range of 2800 yards. At this
range the bullets used to whiz over the hill and drop amongst us,
although we were only a few yards behind the crest. Higginson and I
used to spend hours lying on the crest with rifles and glasses trying
to spot them, but never succeeded in doing so, as they used to take up
their position before dawn and never move all day.

It was about this time that our men began to show the effects of
exposure and constant sentry-go, and several of them went down with
fever and rheumatism; but we were extremely lucky throughout the
siege, having only one casualty: Private Ward, 'G' company, a
reservist, who died of enteric at Intombi Camp.

I forgot to mention that on January 6th our section had to be entirely
denuded of supports and reserves in order that they might be sent to
Waggon Hill, so that if the enemy had attacked us seriously we should
have had a hard job to keep them back.

On January 25th the detachment was ordered to garrison Liverpool
Castle, a fort overlooking the Newcastle Road, but we had not been
there twelve hours before we were ordered to Tunnel Hill. This latter
post consisted of a large main fort capable of holding two hundred
men, and two small works about a quarter of a mile on each flank, in
all of which we had to find a guard. Our fighting strength was at this
time reduced to twenty-seven men, so that they did guard and patrol
alternate nights. We had to send out five of the latter during the
night about half a mile to the front and a mile laterally along the
valley. The confinement in this fort was rather trying, and the
eternal manning of the trenches at 4 a.m. very monotonous. After about
three weeks on this post I was suddenly seized with a 'go' of fever,
and was sent down to a room in one of the houses. When I rejoined the
detachment, after a fortnight on the sick list, they had moved to the
railway station as guard over the bridge across the Klip River. Here
we had to endure rather a severe dose of 'Long Tom'--this gun never
missed a day without dropping shells into and round the station, it
was one of its favourite spots, and all the tin buildings about bore
evidence of its attentions. One shell, pitching in the parcels office,
blew the roof off and the floor in, having first penetrated
half-a-dozen walls to get there. We had trenches on our side of the
river, which we manned, as usual, at 4 a.m. We also had to man them in
the afternoon about 5 o'clock, when the train from Intombi Camp was
due. This used to be rather a comic proceeding: a 'key' was made in
the line about half a mile outside the station, where the train was
brought to a standstill, then either Higginson or myself had to walk
out and inspect the train to see there were no Boers inside it. We
often used to wonder what would have been our lot if the train had
been full of them. On our reporting 'all correct' to the Railway Staff
Officer (Captain Young, R.E.), the train was allowed to proceed into
the station, and the little play was over till the next day. This was
undoubtedly the most comfortable job we had, as the men lived in a
shed, whilst Higginson and I had a railway carriage.

On the afternoon of February 28th we heard the joyful tidings of
General Buller's victory at Pieter's Hill, and in the evening descried
Lord Dundonald and his men crossing the plain; our wild excitement may
be left to the imagination. I'm sure we all put on about seven pounds
of our lost weight at the mere thought of our being at last relieved.
Our troubles were not over yet, however, as the next morning we were
ordered back to Tunnel Hill, a spot we had learned to loathe with a
truly deep loathing. This move was due to our flying column going out
to hurry the enemy's retreat, most of the troops in our section taking
part in it. For some unknown reason we were kept four or five days in
that smelly fort, and it was not till March 7th that we received
orders to rejoin the battalion, which was encamped about two miles out
of Ladysmith. We all felt as though we had begun a new life; but it
was heartbreaking to see the havoc in our regiment; one had to look
about to find faces that one recognised.

Our rations were pretty well reduced towards the end of the siege: one
biscuit, one pound of horseflesh, two teaspoonfuls of sugar, and a
pinch of tea is not much to keep body and soul together, and we were
all pretty feeble and pulled down. I think we must have done the
record piquet duty of any men in any service, as we were never
relieved throughout the whole siege; I suppose this was on account of
being left as a separate unit all through, but we certainly thought it
rather hard work. It is a wonder that our little detachment stuck out
four months' constant exposure with so little sickness, whilst our
luck in sitting under that constant shelling without a man being hit
was nothing short of providential.

I have merely chronicled the chief moves and duties of the detachment
throughout the siege: it would take a small book to set down all our
little experiences, details, and troubles.




CHAPTER X.

ALIWAL NORTH AND FOURTEEN STREAMS.

  'But thus much is certain: that he that commands the
    sea is at great liberty, and may take as much,
      and as little of the war, as he wish.'

                              _Bacon._


After marching through Ladysmith, the battalion proceeded with the
11th Brigade to a camp about three miles to the north of the town and
on the left bank of the Klip River. It remained here until March 7th,
when it rejoined the 5th Brigade, which was encamped on the south side
of the Klip River, and about one mile nearer Ladysmith. On the same
date, Colonel Cooper was given the command of the 4th Brigade, and
accordingly handed over the battalion to Major Bird.

[Illustration: Sergeant Davis in Meditation over 'Long Cecil' at
Kimberley. 'Shall I take it for the Officers?']

There was another change of camping-ground on March 12th, the brigade
moving to the north-east of Ladysmith, under Surprise Hill. It was an
uneventful time, although outpost duties were somewhat severe.

In recognition of the gallantry displayed by the Irish regiments in
the Natal campaign, the Queen had directed that the shamrock should be
worn by all ranks on St. Patrick's Day. Accordingly, on March 17th,
every man wore a piece of green, since shamrock was unobtainable, and
the tents were decorated with boughs. A telegram was dispatched to the
Queen, who sent the following message in reply:--

'The Queen desires to thank her Dublin Fusiliers for their expression
of loyalty.'

[Illustration: St. Patrick's Day in Camp. Private Monaghan, the regimental
Butcher, in foreground.]

The battalion also received many congratulatory telegrams from Irish
associations and individuals in various parts of the world.

The detachment of the 1st Battalion was sent back to Colenso on March
21st. It had been just over four months with the 2nd Battalion, and
had borne its full share of the casualties. Originally numbering
eight officers and 287 rank and file, it returned with only two
officers and 92 rank and file.

The 5th Brigade moved on the 23rd to Modderspruit, and thence on the
next day to Elandslaagte, where it encamped a short distance to the
west of the battlefield. Here it stayed for ten days, and, as there
was little to do beyond outpost work, the battalion resumed ordinary
parades and route marching.

On April 4th, General Warren's Division relieved General Hunter's at
Elandslaagte, and the brigade marched back to Modderspruit. The 10th
Division (General Hunter), which consisted of the 5th and 6th
Brigades, was to proceed to Cape Colony for the relief of Mafeking.

On April 7th, Major Tempest Hicks, 1st Battalion Royal Dublin
Fusiliers, arrived from Colenso, and assumed command of the battalion.
The 5th Brigade began to move by train to Durban on the 9th, and we
were ordered to entrain at 1.45 p.m. on the 10th. But during the
morning, heavy firing broke out at Elandslaagte, and, as the enemy
seemed aggressive, the troops at Modderspruit were directed to be
ready to move to Elandslaagte.

We had struck camp and packed all the baggage in the train, and had,
therefore, to lie out in the hot sun for several hours, and await with
patience the development of events. The Boers apparently contented
themselves by a demonstration, and at 6 p.m. the battalion was allowed
to depart. The train reached Colenso at 9 p.m., where the 1st
Battalion was encamped, and Maritzburg about 4 a.m. Here, in spite of
the early hour, a number of friends, together with a band, were on the
platform, and the regiment received a warm greeting. The men were
given cigarettes and tobacco.

Durban was reached about 10 a.m. on April 11th, and the battalion at
once commenced to embark. The headquarters and about six companies
were carried by the _Cephalonia_, while the remaining two companies
went in the _Jamaica_. They were both slow ships, but the absolute
peace, the good food, the clean baths, and many other luxuries, made
everybody regret that they were not even slower.

East London was reached on the 12th, and the battalion was ordered to
disembark, since the 5th Brigade was urgently required to relieve
Wepener, which was surrounded by the enemy. General Hart, with the
Border Regiment and Somersetshire Light Infantry[7] started for Aliwal
North at once, but the battalion remained on board during the whole of
the 13th, although 'H' company, under Captain Romer, disembarked in
the afternoon, and was at once dispatched by train. The other
companies landed on the 14th, and left East London in two trains,
starting at 4 and 6 p.m.

         [Footnote 7: This regiment had joined the 5th Brigade after
         the relief of Ladysmith in place of the Inniskilling
         Fusiliers.]

Lieutenant Le Mesurier, who had been captured on October 20th, but
had, with Captain Haldane (Gordon Highlanders), effected a plucky
escape from Pretoria, rejoined us at East London. Unluckily he at once
developed typhoid fever, and had to be left behind.

Aliwal North was not reached until 10.30 a.m. on April 16th. 'H'
company had arrived the previous afternoon, and was encamped near the
station, but the remainder of the battalion crossed the Orange River,
and pitched camp about 600 yards from the bridge, with its outpost
line pushed forward on the high ground to the north.

Major Hicks became commandant of Aliwal North, and had no easy task.
The town was General Hart's base during the operations for the relief
of Wepener, and there was consequently much to be done. Moreover, the
surrounding country was disturbed, the Dutch population had to be
watched, and there were constant rumours of the approach of
commandoes. In the early hours of the 21st, a report reached the
commandant that a large body of Boers was marching on the town. He
therefore decided to bring the regiment back to the south side of the
river, only leaving the piquets on the north bank. We therefore at
once struck camp, and, crossing the river, bivouacked near the bridge.
But as the report proved to be misleading, camp was re-pitched on a
square in the middle of Aliwal North. The outskirts of the town were
put into a state of defence, and a series of trenches covered the
approaches to the bridge. Although this necessitated much labour,
everybody enjoyed their stay at Aliwal. It was a pretty place, with
trees and gardens full of roses, with plenty of water, including a hot
stream running through the camp, with a well-stocked library, and
lastly, but by no means leastly, with a hotel possessing excellent
lager beer.

[Illustration: A Wash in hot Water. Aliwal North.]

The time passed, in fact, too quickly, for on the 26th news was
received of the relief of Wepener, and orders were issued for our
movement to Kimberley. We started at once in two trains, the first
leaving at midnight the second at 1 a.m. on the 27th. It was a long
and monotonous journey, the only breaks in which were stops for the
purpose of cooking meals. Kimberley was reached at 10 p.m. on the
28th, and the train stopped the night in the station, going on at 6
a.m. on the 29th to Doornfield, about eight miles north of Kimberley,
where the Connaught Rangers and the 6th Brigade were already encamped.
Since General Hart, with the Borders and Somersetshire Light Infantry
were still near Wepener, Colonel Brooke assumed the command of the
brigade.

General Hunter's division had been ordered to relieve Mafeking, and
the General decided to cross the Vaal near Windsorton with the 6th
Brigade, and to advance up the right bank; while General Paget with
the Royal Munster Fusiliers, Connaught Rangers, and Royal Dublin
Fusiliers, faced the Boer position at Fourteen Streams. Colonel
Mahon's mounted column was to move by Barkley West, and reach Mafeking
by sweeping round the Boer flank.

The battalion accordingly left Doornfield by train at 9 a.m. on May
2nd, and about mid-day reached Content, where it detrained and
encamped. The next day it marched with the Connaught Rangers to a
position about two miles south of Warrenton. The opposite bank of the
Vaal was held by the Boers, who were strongly entrenched and had
field-guns. On the south bank of the Vaal were the Munster Fusiliers,
a battery of field artillery, a six-inch gun mounted on a railway
truck, and a balloon, the whole detachment being under Major-General
Paget.

[Illustration: Taking XIV STREAMS on 7th May 1900 at 9.30 a.m. very
bad ford. _From a sketch by Col. H. Tempest Hicks, C.B._]

As all tents had been left at Content, the regiment bivouacked, and
remained more or less idle. The Munsters were holding Warrenton, and
there was constant sniping between their posts and the Boer trenches.
The balloon ascended daily, and the six-inch gun fired an occasional
shot, while the enemy's field-guns came into action at intervals. It
was a monotonous and unpleasant time for the Connaught Rangers and
ourselves, since there was nothing to do, while it was very hot by day
and cold by night.

[Illustration: The regimental Maxim in Action at Fourteen Streams.]

A little excitement was afforded on May 6th, when the Connaught
Rangers and half the battalion made a demonstration against a drift to
the east of Fourteen Streams. The object apparently was to draw the
Boers' attention from the 6th Brigade, who, after a victory at Rooi
Dam, were moving up the right bank. The movement caused a slight
amount of sniping, and the detachment returned to the bivouac soon
after 2 p.m.

The approach of the 6th Brigade, aided, perhaps, by this
demonstration, caused the enemy to evacuate hurriedly their trenches
during the afternoon of the 6th. Early on the morning of the 7th, the
Connaught Rangers and the right half-battalion started to ford the
Vaal at Warrenton.

The river at this point was broad and swift. The ford was a difficult
one, being beset by rocks and holes, and it took a considerable time
for the column to cross, since the water was up to the men's waists.
The left half-battalion under Major Bird moved one and a half miles up
the river near Fourteen Streams, where there was a ferry-boat. The
latter had been rendered useless by the Boers, but as they had left
the wire hawser, it was easy for the Royal Engineers to construct a
raft, on which the left half-battalion crossed comfortably and
quickly.

The right half-battalion joined the left half at the ferry, and
breakfasts were cooked. Before leaving the river-bank everybody made
an inspection of the Boer trenches, which formed an exceedingly strong
position. They were very deep, and so well adapted to the ground, that
it was no easy matter to discover them from the opposite bank.
Evidences of the hurried Boer retreat were plentiful in the shape of
full ammunition-boxes, half-cooked food, blankets, and kettles. One
Boer, who was too ill to march, was captured in the trenches.

After breakfasts, the battalion moved through a piece of ground
thickly covered with bush, and eventually bivouacked about one mile
from the Vaal, near the railway line. The 6th Brigade halted near the
same place, and the whole force was occupied for the next fortnight in
covering Fourteen Streams. The important railway bridge at this point
had been destroyed by the Boers, and the Royal Engineers, aided by
large working parties from the infantry, at once commenced to
construct a deviation bridge. This necessitated a great amount of
labour, and since, in addition, defensive works had to be made, we
were all kept very busy.

The stay at Fourteen Streams was interrupted on May 15th by a movement
on Christiana, a town in the Transvaal, reported to be held by a
strong party of Boers. The whole of the 10th Division took part in the
operations, and were thus the first regular troops to enter the
Transvaal. The frontier was crossed at 9 a.m. The advance was through
an undulating country, at times thickly covered by bush. Towards the
afternoon the brigade halted, as news was received that the mounted
troops had entered Christiana. A bivouac was formed in a clearing
among the bush, and dinners were cooked.

The next day the brigade marched back to Fourteen Streams, and reached
that place early on May 17th, having done some twenty-six miles in
nineteen hours. Work on the railway bridge was resumed, and, as the
6th Brigade had not returned, the battalion had to watch a more
extensive area. Each company was given a section, and constructed a
redoubt.

[Illustration: Captain Jervis, General Fitzroy Hart, C.B., C.M.G., and
Captain Arthur Hart.]

About May 24th, Second Lieutenant Bradford, with twenty-nine men, was
sent up the line to garrison Border Siding, where they were picked up
three days later.

The deviation bridge over the Vaal having been completed, the
battalion was sent forward by train to Vryburg, travelling in two
trains. Camp was pitched just outside the station, and for the next
two days every one spent their time in buying _karosses_ and in
shooting partridges.

The 10th Division, when Mafeking had been relieved by Colonel Mahon,
was ordered to march to Johannesburg viâ Lichtenburg. As the first
part of the route lay through a country very deficient in water, the
division marched in several columns, which followed each other at a
day's interval. The battalion left Vryburg on May 30th at 7.30 a.m.,
and proceeded to Devondale, and on the next day made a march of
twenty-two miles to Dornbult, where Captain Mainwaring, with Second
Lieutenants Newton and Smith, joined.

Their wanderings before they succeeded in doing so are sufficient
evidence how little was known, even to our own staff officers of the
whereabouts of the several columns. On arrival at Cape Town in the
s.s. _Oratava_, they were transhipped to the s.s. _Ranee_ and sent to
Port Elizabeth. On reporting themselves there they were entrained and
sent to Bloemfontein. No one there seemed to know where the regiment
was, but at that very time the report arrived of the march on
Christiana. Captain Mainwaring then met Captain Carington Smith of the
regiment, who was at that time serving in Roberts' Horse (which he
later on commanded), and as that officer was shortly going north with
some men of his corps, it seemed to both that the speediest way to get
to the Dublin Fusiliers was for Captain Mainwaring to be attached to
Roberts' Horse. An application to that effect was made to the staff
and granted, but shortly afterwards the news of the Christiana
column's return to the railway came to hand, so the three officers
once more entrained, and proceeded viâ De Aar to Kimberley.

Although Captain Carington Smith did not serve with either battalion
during the war, it would not be out of place here to mention the great
part he took in it. He commenced by serving in Roberts' Horse, and was
with them throughout Lord Roberts' advance to Bloemfontein. In the
action at Sanna's Post he was shot through the knee, but resolutely
refused to be invalided home. His recovery from this severe wound was
little short of marvellous, and he actually managed to rejoin the
headquarters of his corps in time to share in the entry into
Pretoria. Shortly after this he was again shot at Heidelberg, this
time through the other knee, and again made a second and equally
marvellous recovery. Towards the end of the war he commanded Roberts'
Horse, and later on the South African Light Horse, and his trekking
during the campaign amounted to no less than 9000 miles.

[Illustration: Issuing Queen Victoria's Chocolate. Colour-Sergeant
Connel, 'G' Company, on left.]




PART II.

TREKKING.




CHAPTER I.

VRYBURG TO HEIDELBERG.

  'None of us put off our clothes.'

                              _Neh._ iv. 23.


Now commenced a different phase of warfare. If, in the constant
fighting of the Natal campaign, the regiment had been called upon to
prove its fighting capabilities--a call to which their noble response
earned them encomiums wherever they went--they were now to be called
upon to prove another essential of the true soldier--their mobility.
And well they proved it. Day after day, week after week, the tired,
footsore, but stout-hearted column-of-route made its slow and
wearisome way over the apparently limitless expanse of the swelling
veld. And how monotonous that veld can be none can appreciate save
those who have experienced its deadly sameness. Ahead, behind, all
round, nothing but veld, veld, veld. No trees, no hills, no rivers, no
lakes, no houses, no inhabitants! Here and there, perhaps, a miserable
shanty of the sealed-pattern South African type: rough stone walls and
corrugated-iron roof, a room on each side of the door, a narrow
verandah--occasionally occupied by a quiet, peaceful-looking old
patriarch, with a grey beard, and an air savouring rather of the
pulpit than the sheltered side of a boulder--a scraggy tree or two,
and a lick of water in a 'pan'--or pond as we should call it--hard by;
a woman, some children, and a couple of goats; a few mealie cobs
yellowing on the roof, and a scared, indignant, and attenuated fowl.

Alas! how those quiet-looking, quiet-spoken old gentlemen, open Bible
on knee, deceived us. Oh, no! they had never wished for war. Fight?
yes; they had fought, and surrendered, and taken the oath, and hoped
never to fight again. Peace? yes; they wanted peace, and urged us to
hasten on and conclude it. The same story everywhere: in the villages
as in the solitary hamlets. A vast, empty, forsaken wilderness, with
nothing more bellicose than a lean and hungry boar-hound or two. And
yet for two long years to come this very country, over which the
battalion trekked so peacefully, fifes and drums playing, officers out
on the flanks shooting, mess-president cantering miles away in quest
of eggs and their producers, was to be the scene of many a hard-fought
fight and many weary nights of outposts. Indeed, it never really
succumbed to the very end; the happy hunting-ground of the gallant De
la Rey, it was a thorn in the side of our leaders up to the day the
Delegates came in.

One day's march varied little from another. Up at dawn, and off after
the scantiest of scrappy breakfasts. Good marching while the dew was
on the grass, and the sun a welcome ally after the clear, crisp,
frosty nights; soon, however, to get hot enough, until the welcome
mid-day halt and meal, after which tighten up belts once more and on,
and on, one horizon following another with wearisome regularity, and
never a sign of the long-looked-for water, till at last, as the sun
set behind our backs, its last rays would glint on the miserable 'pan'
by whose side we were to halt for the night. And then what bitter
feelings of depression and disgust when sometimes the fiat would go
forth 'Water for cooking purposes only,' and one had to turn into
one's blankets grimy, dusty, clammy, and miserable.

On May 31st, the regiment, having arrived at the railway, was told
they would halt there next day. But on the morning of June 1st, the
order was given for the column[8] to march at 2 p.m. to Marigobo Pan,
a distance of eight miles only, but quite ten by the route taken. The
evenings soon close in at this time of year in South Africa, and it
was almost dark when the column arrived. As it was a fine mild night,
every one hoped to be allowed to bivouac, but tents were pitched after
all, and naturally enough pitched anyhow.

         [Footnote 8: Border Regiment, Royal Dublin Fusiliers, Bearer
         Company, and Supply Detachment.]

In this matter of pitching tents, the battalion particularly prided
itself. On arrival at the selected site of the camp the Sergeant-Major
blew a whistle, when all those whose duty it was to assist ran towards
him, the men to mark the tent-poles, bayonets in hand, and two others
with the mekometer, to ensure a true right-angle. Every one knew his
particular job, so no time was wasted, while the symmetrical lines
obtained by the use of the instrument were a joy to the General's
eye.[9]

         [Footnote 9: _Vide_ General Hart's letter in Appendix.]

[Illustration: First Entry into Krugersdorp. Captain and Adjutant
Fetherstonhaugh in foreground.]

In the same way, whenever a halt was ordered, it was the regiment's
custom to lay out their kits, mess-tins, belts, &c., in lines outside
their tents. Each Colour-Sergeant had a ball of string, which was
stretched between a couple of pegs; the kits were laid along it, the
string was rolled up and pitched into a tent, and neatness and
regularity prevailed without any extra trouble to any one. This
neatness in camp, in addition to its other soldierly qualities,
endeared the battalion in the eyes of General Hart, a soldier of the
old school, to whom order and regularity particularly appealed.

On the 2nd the column made another short march to Greysdorp, where
there were two or three good wells, but where the water in the pan was
of a most peculiar green colour.

The Mafeking relief column was met on the way, and very hard and
serviceable they looked, while several officers met old friends,
amongst others Prince Alexander of Teck, whom we had known at
Maritzburg before the war.

A longish march of nineteen or twenty miles on the 3rd, with a halt
midway, brought us in the evening to a place called Barber's Pan,
somewhat superior to the generality of these places. There was a
certain amount of water in the pan, but brackish and unpleasant to
drink. Round it were scattered some half-dozen houses, but the most
remarkable thing in connection with it was the sunset. As the light
faded, a mist rose from the veld, which after a few minutes began to
change colour, until at last it settled down to a most beautiful shade
of light green. None of us had seen anything similar before, nor did
we ever see anything like it again.

A march of about fourteen or fifteen miles on the 4th brought us to a
most uncomfortable camp. On the way, Captain Fetherstonhaugh (acting
Adjutant since Captain Lowndes was hit at Talana) rode off some
distance to a flank to try and get some supplies. He returned with a
great story of his reception by crowds of women and one or two men;
the latter stated they had been reluctantly compelled to fight against
us at Modder River, on pain of being shot, but that their sympathies
were entirely with us, &c. They even gave him a pound of butter. And
we believed this story at the time.

But, for that matter, who would not have been taken in? Every one
coming up the line brought better and better news. Lord Roberts was
close to the capital, and, thought we in our simplicity, that of
course must end the war. No one guessed there was extra time--two
solid years extra time--to be played. So we enjoyed the butter, and
said they were sensible people after all, and hoped we'd be in time
for the siege of Pretoria.

The next day's march was a pleasanter one than usual, the halts being
better arranged, with the result that the troops and transport got
into camp quite as early as they would have done under the ordinary
circumstances, but very much fresher and fitter. The fact is, staff
officers do not understand marching. They go tittuping gaily past long
straggling columns, passing the time of day cheerily to friends, and
momentarily halting to deliver some ironical knock to acquaintances on
the subject of their transport, or their sections of fours, or
something of the sort. But the regimental officer, who foots it
alongside his company, he understands marching right enough. He will
tell you when the going is good, and when it only looks good; he will
tell you the effects of five-minute halts, and how much benefit the
closing-up rear of the column derives from them; he will tell you when
a steady, swinging pace is being set that the men could keep up for
ever; and he will also tell you when some long-legged officer in front
is going four miles an hour, till some one suggests it is too fast,
and he sinks into a slow and tiring two and a half. Colonel Hicks
commanded the column on the 5th, and let us march our own way, with
the beneficial results already recorded.

And that cheery rumour about Pretoria. French reported to be there,
and Mr. Kruger gone off with a couple of millions. What did we care
about the latter? We should not have got any of it.

Another short march of a little over ten miles brought us to a camp
where there was actually a stream. Here the men got the chance of a
much-needed bathe, and how they enjoyed it! Every one, in fact, was in
excellent spirits, for the news about Pretoria turned out to be true,
and though some of us were disappointed at not being up in time to
share in the triumphant entry into the capital, the majority were all
for England, home, and beauty.

On the 7th we arrived at Lichtenburg, a small town or village that was
to see some heavy fighting later on in the war. On the present
occasion all seemed most peaceful. The houses were of the stereotyped
South African pattern, with the invariable half-stoep, half-verandah
running half-way along their fronts. Clear streams of water ran coolly
and pleasingly by the sides of the streets, shaded by the ubiquitous
weeping-willow. There was nothing to be bought, and no one to be seen,
however, and those of us who went into the town next morning were very
soon satisfied, returning to camp minus the various articles we had
set forth to buy. It was interesting, however, to see the Boers
handing in their rifles and taking the oath of allegiance.

Captain MacBean, who was now on General Hunter's staff, turned up
here, and dined with the regiment, and very glad we were to see him.
He gave us all sorts of news, too, which we were very deficient of, as
the system of daily bulletins had not then started.

After having halted for the 8th and 9th, we resumed our desert march
on the 10th, but only made some ten miles. It was most bitterly cold
all the way.

The next day proved far pleasanter, and another short, easy march of
about ten miles saw us in camp by 1.30 p.m.

On the 12th we made a march of sixteen miles. We were then within
about thirty-three miles of the railway from Johannesburg to
Potchefstroom, and, when a wire came ordering us to do it in two days,
we thought a lot of the task, whereas a few months later we were doing
that distance in one day, and, curiously enough, almost in the same
neighbourhood.

In consequence of this we marched right through Ventersdorp, to our
regret, as it looked quite a nice place, and there was a regular
trout-stream flowing past it, in which a bathe would have been most
welcome. We did eighteen miles before halting.

As indicative of the curious state of the war even in these early
days, General Hunter's experience at Vryburg was a good example. He
had ridden on with only thirty cavalrymen to Ventersdorp, when
suddenly some two hundred and fifty of the enemy appeared on the
scene. Fortunately for the General, their only object was to give up
their arms and take the oath.

Starting at 7.30 a.m. next day, we made short work of the march to the
railway, which we struck at Frederickstadt, a place that many of us
were destined to become very well acquainted with before we had done.
It is rather prettier than most Boer villages, being situated on the
pleasant little Mooi River, whose clear, rapid current reminded us of
our home streams. There are a few trees in the vicinity, whilst on the
further bank and beyond the railway rise the serrated, well-wooded,
and extremely picturesque Gatsrand Hills.

There was only one man to be seen, peacefully hoeing his potato-patch.
But if the men were scarce and polite, the same could not be said for
the fair sex, who, despite the fact that their knowledge of English
was only to be compared with our ignorance of Dutch, did not fail to
let us know their opinions of things generally. Indeed, the
mess-president, who had gone on ahead on a pony in search of
farmyard products, had a battle-royal with an elderly Dutch lady who
asked six shillings a dozen for her eggs.

We heard more detailed accounts here of the relief of Mafeking, and of
the gallant part Major Godley of ours had taken in its defence, while
Major Pilson and Captain Kinsman (also Royal Dublin Fusiliers) had
assisted in the relief. As Carington Smith had arrived in Kimberley
with the cavalry, we were able to claim representation in all three of
the great sieges and reliefs of the war.

[Illustration: 'Speed Dead Slow.']

But a disappointment was in store for us all the same. The column did
not move next day (the 15th), but although engine after engine came
puffing up from Potchefstroom they all failed to bring the carriages
which our aching legs made us so anxiously look for. We heard of the
strike of forty engine-drivers at Potchefstroom, but as they had all
been cast into durance vile, and the engines still continued to
arrive, that could not have been the reason. However, any doubts we
entertained were soon set at rest by an order to continue our march to
Johannesburg next day.

[Illustration: Miscellaneous Casualties.

  Lieut. ELY. _Died at sea of Enteric._
  Capt. H. CARINGTON SMITH. _Wounded at Sanna's Post and Heidelberg._
  Capt. WATSON. (_Attached to Scottish Horse_). _Killed at Moedwil._
  Capt. H. J. KINSMAN. _Wounded in Transvaal._
  Capt. J. A. MACBEAN. _Killed at Nooitgedacht._
  Lieut. ADRIAN TAYLOR. _Severely wounded when serving with M.I. near
    Parys._]

Starting on the 16th, an uneventful march of twelve miles brought us
to Wolverdiend, a place which had not then attained the importance it
afterwards assumed.

It was another fifteen on to Blauw Bank Station next day. This march
was remarkable in that it was the first occasion since this trek
started that the column moved with any military precautions worth
mentioning.

Leaving Bank, as it got to be called later on, we struck off from the
railway, left shoulders up, in a bee-line for Johannesburg, the city
of our dreams, which it was hard to believe was not paved with gold,
if one listened to the reports of those who had been there before the
war. After a short march of ten miles we halted at a farm called
Gemsbokfontein, and looked with longing eyes at the distant ridge,
peeping over which could plainly be seen the huge mine-chimneys, like
sentinels along the hills, duly noting our arrival.

A fierce grass-fire broke out here, which necessitated the active
co-operation of all hands, and all blankets, to oppose it, one
too-adventurous officer getting rather scorched for his pains.

As we sat at lunch we could see General Mahon's mounted column
ascending the long rise to Randfontein, on our left front, and heard
they had gone to Krugersdorp.

'Krugersdorp! Where's that?' 'Let's look at your map,' and so on.
Well, we undoubtedly knew where it was a few weeks later. Moreover,
there must be Boers there, for had not a party on an engine come out
that very day, and after destroying a small bridge, and firing a
couple of shots, snorted their way back to the Dorp.

The Royal Dublin Fusiliers supplied the advanced guard on the 19th,
and duly started for Johannesburg, but a message very shortly came
ordering a left incline, and nominating Krugersdorp as our objective.
It was disappointing, but General Mahon had reported the
Krugersdorpers 'truculent,' and we had to make a demonstration. This
we most certainly did, halting above the railway, just outside the
town, and then--producing drums and fifes--forming up and marching
through to 'St. Patrick's Day' and the 'British Grenadiers.' But,
unlike the peaceful and amiable agriculturist, these townsfolk had no
smiles of reciprocation to our advances, and we marched through long
lines of scowling male faces, with here and there one or two of the
fair sex, but also, alas! sombre to a degree.

[Illustration: Hoisting The Union Jack at Krugersdorp.]

After emerging on the far side of the town we passed the famous
Paardekraal Monument on our right, and finally camped about half a
mile further on. It appears it was a very close thing whether they
opposed us or not, and the peaceful solution that eventually took
place was largely due to the tactful intervention and determination of
an Englishman, Mr. W. Bruce Honman, who had considerable influence
amongst the Dutch.

The troops halted at Krugersdorp next day, and the town was formally
taken over in the Queen's name, an impressive parade for that purpose
being held in the market square. Each regiment furnished a Guard of
Honour of 100 men. The Royal Dublin Fusilier Guard was under the
command of Major English, with Captain Higginson and Lieutenant
Haskard. It was extremely interesting for those of us who were not on
duty to watch the faces of the large numbers of Boers, male and
female, who watched this ceremony and the hoisting of the Union Jack.
On the whole they took it extremely well, and for the most part
behaved like brave men, who, having fought and lost, were content to
make the best of the situation.

[Illustration: Johan Meyer's House, five Miles outside Johannesburg.]

The trek commenced again on the 22nd, and this time we felt convinced
our destination must be Johannesburg, as we were marching along the
Witwaters Rand straight for it. A halt was made after some ten miles,
at Florida, rather a pleasant sort of Saturday-to-Monday resort of
Johannesburgers, with a nice lake and pleasant woods.

At last we seemed about to receive our reward, only to have our hopes
dashed rudely to the ground. True, we marched to Johannesburg, and
even through it, but only through the most miserable of its slums,
seeing nothing of its fine buildings, nothing of the wealth and
magnificence we had confidently expected. But, indeed, even the
finest part of it was only a sorry spectacle in those days, and for
many a weary month afterwards. Skirting the racecourse, we marched on
to a spot some six miles from the town, near the house of Johan Meyer,
a brother of Lucas Meyer. Colonel Hicks and Captain Fetherstonhaugh
called on this gentleman, and got a lot of interesting information
from him. His house was one of the finest we saw in the whole
Transvaal, and from its site--at the head of a fine valley--commanded
a magnificent view of the country almost as far as Heidelberg.

But, as some set-off to our disappointment and long, tiring march of
fifteen miles, Captain Sir Frederick Frankland, who had gone on to
Joh'burg, as it is universally called, to buy what stores he could,
turned up just before dinner, not only with a large amount of
provisions, but also with a case of excellent champagne, which he
presented to the mess, God bless him! We were very proud of our noble
Baronet that night, and he had to reply to the toast of his health
over and over again.

[Illustration: Sergeant Davis, evidently with All we wanted.]

Sergeant Davis, champion forager of the Army, also put in an
appearance here, having met with no end of adventures and
misadventures since the Colonel had sent him back to the
Kimberley-Mafeking Railway. As usual, he had a fine lot of stores,
and, also as usual, just what we wanted: baccy, chocolate, biscuits,
sjamboks, stamps, etc., etc.

An uneventful march of fifteen miles, with a halt at Reitfontein, was
only noticeable for a particularly cold night and the final splitting
up of the Irish Brigade, the Connaughts and Borders being ordered to
Pretoria.

On the 25th our long march came to an end with a twelve-mile step into
Heidelberg. The band of the Derbyshire Regiment played us in, while
our old friend, General Bruce Hamilton, rode out to meet us. We halted
on a slope about three-quarters of a mile outside the town, which in
its essential features is remarkably like Krugersdorp, the streets
being lined with tall blue-gum trees, and the plan of course
rectangular, with the usual market square in the centre.

There had been a fight here, and we found Captain Carington Smith
again amongst the wounded; this time, as already mentioned, with a
bullet through his other knee, but as cheery as ever, and smiling away
at seeing us all again. Lieutenant Adrian Taylor, of the regiment, was
also here, and very glad we were to see him once more. Like Captain
Carington Smith he was detached from the regiment throughout the
campaign, serving with the M.I., and was about a month later very
severely wounded near Parys when De Wet crossed the Vaal with Lord
Kitchener at his heels. Still another Dublin Fusilier met us at
Heidelberg--Major Rutherford, Adjutant of the Ceylon Volunteers, who
had come over in command of a detachment of that corps.

In addition to all these, General Cooper (our late C.O.) and his
A.D.C., Lieutenant Renny, R.D.F., were also coming up from the south,
while the 1st Battalion, who had helped to win Alleman's Nek, were not
far off.

On arrival at Heidelberg we had marched just 300 miles in
twenty-seven days, and although we had not pressed in any way, we had
come along fairly well seeing that we were not bound on any specific
object, such as the relief of a town, or the participation in a siege
or battle. We averaged just over eleven miles a day, including halts
at Lichtenburg (two days), Frederickstadt and Krugersdorp (two days),
or just a shade under fourteen miles for each marching day.

[Illustration: Paardekraal Monument, Krugersdorp.]




CHAPTER II.

HEIDELBERG.

  'Wherever a man's post is, whether he has chosen it of his own
  will, or whether he has been placed at it by his commander, there
  it is his duty to remain and face the danger, without thinking of
  death, or of any other thing except dishonour.'--_Socrates._

  'Such officers do the King best service in the end.'--_Hamlet._


A considerable force had now assembled at Heidelberg, but it was not
to remain there long. General Hunter took over command from General
Ian Hamilton, who had had a bad fall from his horse, and shortly moved
off to the Free State, where he and his men soon covered themselves
with distinction by the rounding-up of Prinsloo's commandoes near
Golden Gate, on the Basuto border.

The 2nd Royal Dublin Fusiliers, a half-battalion Somersetshire Light
Infantry, and the 28th Field Battery Royal Artillery, with some
details, were left to garrison Heidelberg.

The battalion was soon split up into a number of small detachments,
and posted at various places along the railway line, which had
suffered considerably at the hands of the Boers. Scarcely a bridge
remained intact, while the presence of wandering bodies of the enemy
in the neighbourhood necessitated the utmost caution and continual
vigilance on the part of the companies, half-companies, and even
sections, into which some of the companies were at length subdivided.

Headquarters and those companies not on detachment in the meantime had
plenty of work cut out for them too. In order to defend the place two
hills to the west of the town were occupied, one by the Royal Dublin
Fusiliers, known as Dublin Hill, and the other by the Somersetshire
Light Infantry. Our hill was put into a most thorough state of
defence by many hours of hard labour and efficient work under the
direction of Colonel Hicks. Sangars were built on every spur and knoll
which afforded a good field of fire; traverses and shelters were
numerous; in case of a night attack whitened stones along well-made
tracks showed the nearest way to the various posts; while not only
every company, but every section, had its well-defined trench or wall
to rally on and hold.

To some of us, indeed, all these precautions at the time seemed
somewhat excessive, and it is true that no attack was ever made; but
just as example is better than precept and practice better than
theory, so prevention is better than cure, and there is little doubt
that the fortification of that hill, in full view of many a Boer
field-glass in the town, whence our movements were of course fully
reported as frequently as possible to the enemy in the field, had a
deterrent effect on any designs our very active foes might otherwise
have contemplated.

On the morning of the 26th the left half-battalion, under Major Bird,
was suddenly ordered off to Nigel Road Station, about three miles out
on the railway to Johannesburg. The Boers having blown up a bridge
between this station and Heidelberg, all stores, &c., arriving from
Johannesburg had to be dumped down on the veld here, and it was
necessary to have a force on the spot to load them into waggons, as
well as to guard them and the trains. These soon began to arrive in
large numbers, and as each came up the sides of the railway waggons
were opened, and their heterogeneous contents chucked out anyhow into
a huge mass. In the mean time R.E. construction trains also arrived,
and the quiet little siding was soon a scene of wild bustle and
excitement. The R.E. went to work on the broken bridge, and made a
most excellent job of it in a surprisingly short time, though a casual
inspection of the temporary structure they built for trains to
pass over gave the lay mind the impression that an extra strong puff
of wind would blow the whole thing over. However, it answered its
purpose very thoroughly, and reflected much credit on its
constructors.

[Illustration: Colonel H. Tempest Hicks, C.B. Commanding 2nd Royal
Dublin Fusiliers March 1900 to March 1904.]

In the meantime Major Bird soon produced law and order out of chaos.
The coolies were made to put mealie-bags in one place and
biscuit-boxes in another, while the soldiers built both up into a very
serviceable sort of fort for the time being, an example of soldierly
adaptability which was not lost on any one who saw it or took part in
its erection.

We spent two or three very cheery days at Nigel Siding, the
stationmaster's house (two rooms) forming an ideal officers' mess, but
on the 28th 'E' and 'F' companies, under Captains Shewan and G. S.
Higginson, were recalled to headquarters, 'H' company, under Captain
Romer, was sent nine miles nearer Johannesburg to guard Reit Vlei
Bridge, while 'G' company remained at Nigel Road to watch over such
stores as had not yet been removed. This company was shortly further
subdivided by the left half-company, under Lieutenant E. St. G. Smith,
being sent to guard a culvert half-way to Reit Vlei Bridge.

In the meantime Colonel Hicks never for a moment relaxed the soldierly
precautions which it was his custom to observe, whether the Boers were
reported in the neighbourhood or not; and several times rumours of
intended attacks did arrive, though they invariably proved false.

The town of Heidelberg itself was very Dutch and seething with
malcontents and treachery. One could easily forgive them for not being
exactly content, but what one could not forgive was their slimness,
their plausible exterior, and their inner mass of falsehood. No class
were more bitter than the clergymen, and one of these gentry was
strongly suspected of being in constant communication with the Boers
in the field, though his oath of neutrality was taken and he was
availing himself of our hospitality. On one occasion Captain G. S.
Higginson spent the night in an empty house in the town in an attempt
to mark this fox to ground, but unfortunately his vigil was
unproductive of result.

Lieutenant Haskard was now acting as Railway Staff Officer, and having
a very busy time of it, as in addition to hundreds of other duties he
had to send rations up and down the line to the various detachments.

On the 9th, Sergeant-Major Burke rejoined the regiment, having been a
prisoner since he was wounded at Talana, and left at Dundee. During
this time his duties had been ably performed by Colour-Sergeant C.
Guilfoyle, now Sergeant-Major, 2nd Battalion Royal Dublin Fusiliers.
Lieutenants Marsh and Weldon also joined here, as Lieutenant Supple
had done a few days before. The two former had followed the regiment
up the line to Mafeking, and thence across the Western Transvaal in a
cape-cart, following very nearly in our tracks. They had an
adventuresome journey, and were delighted to reach us at last. Captain
Clarke, R.M.L.I., who was attached to the regiment, escorted an
important Boer commander, named Van Rensburg, to Johannesburg, on his
way to St. Helena.

It is necessary to explain briefly here the situation of the three
companies, 'A,' 'E,' and 'F,' under Major English, Captain Shewan, and
Captain G. S. Higginson, which had been sent out to guard various
points on the line from Heidelberg to Standerton.

'A' and 'E' companies had originally gone out, and were posted at
Botha's Kraal. Later on it became necessary to hold Zuikerbosch as
well. Major English, with Lieutenant Newton as his subaltern, was sent
to garrison it. Taking 'E' company with him and leaving Captain
Higginson at Botha's Kraal, Major English, with some 110 Royal
Engineers, occupied the post, and at once set about to put it into a
thorough state of defence. He fully recognised the inherent weaknesses
of his situation, and saw that unless well entrenched he was
practically at the mercy of an enemy armed with artillery, as he had
none to reply with, while the nearest reinforcements were miles away,
and liable themselves to be attacked in force at any moment. He
therefore spared no ingenuity in strengthening the position. Having
Royal Engineers and a considerable number of Kaffirs at his disposal,
he very soon effected his purpose and dug himself comfortably in.

In the meantime signs were not wanting of approaching Boer activity. A
large commando, under Hans Botha, was known to be hovering about the
neighbourhood, and as it was also known that Botha was occasionally in
the habit of spending a night under his own roof--not three miles
away--Captain G. S. Higginson made two efforts to catch him napping.
But on neither occasion was the chieftain at home, and the unfortunate
Higginson, who had selected the darkest and wildest nights as most
suitable for his purpose, was foiled each time, and had to withdraw
somewhat crestfallen, under a fire of raillery from the ladies of the
establishment. He collected some valuable information, nevertheless,
and sent in reports of Boers in the vicinity, which, however, were not
sufficient to induce General Hart to take any extra precautions.

Such was the situation of affairs when, on the misty morning of July
21st, we at Heidelberg heard the hoarse barking of the accursed
pompom, varied by the duller and more menacing note of heavier guns.
Anxiously we asked each other what it could be, and reluctantly we
came to the conclusion that our comrades were being submitted to
shell-fire with no possible chance of reprisal. As the sun rose, the
mist did the same, and very soon cheerful messages came twinkling over
'the misty mountain-tops,' announcing that a considerable force of
Boers were attacking them, but that they had little fear of not being
able to keep them off.

General Hart hastily assembled a small column[10] and marched to Major
English's assistance, leaving Colonel Hicks in command of the camp,
and as it was quite possible the main attack might be intended for
Heidelberg, we took all necessary precautions for the safety of the
town.

         [Footnote 10: 130 Somersets, 2 guns, 1 pompom, 140 Marshall's
         Horse.]

Before General Hart's force arrived, the Boers had commenced to
withdraw, having discovered that on this occasion they had attacked a
veritable hornet's nest.

The hill on which Major English had dug his entrenchments is situated
in the angle made by the Zuikerbosch River where it turns sharply to
the south, and was on the left bank of the stream. On the other side
of the river was the hill occupied by the Royal Engineers. Between
these two was the new deviation bridge then under construction. The
Kaffirs lived in the hollow between the hills, as did also the
Yeomanry, of whom there were about ten, under a very young officer.
Major English had given this officer orders that, on any attack taking
place, he should at once lead his horses down to the river, where
there was a kind of hollow place which would have afforded them
excellent cover. This order, however, probably from the suddenness of
the attack, was not complied with in time, and the horses were in
consequence stampeded almost immediately. The natives also were not
long in effecting a rapid southerly movement, for which, of course,
they cannot be blamed, and the Boers shelled them lustily as they
streamed away.

The Royal Dublin Fusiliers' camp was on the southern slope of the
hill, the summit being occupied at night by alternate companies, who
stood to arms shortly before dawn. Captain Shewan was on the hill, and
on the point of letting the men fall out, when the attack commenced.
The trenches were at once manned without the slightest noise or
confusion, and the Boers' rifle-fire vigorously replied to.

The two Boer guns were in position on the hills to the north, some
3400 yards off, while the pompom came into action near the Fortuna
coal-mine. Owing to the excellent disposition and construction of the
defences, the enemy's fire made little or no impression, until after a
time they began to move round to the flanks of the position. Their
rifle-fire then began to have some effect, but at the same time the
fire of the defence had a better target, and after a short time the
burghers commenced to withdraw from the rear face of the work. In the
meantime they had swung round to the west of the Engineers' hill, and
under cover of a grass fire, which was lighted by them and spread
right up to the trenches, endeavoured to attack this part of the
position, in which, however, they also failed. The enemy continued his
endeavours until mid-day, when he commenced to withdraw, his movement
being somewhat expedited by the arrival of the reinforcements under
the General.

Considering the numbers of the attacking force, and the resolute
manner in which they had persevered, the casualties were
extraordinarily small, two officers and three men wounded, one of the
former being Major English himself; he was struck by a shell splinter
in the eye, but most fortunately did not lose the sight of it.

This gallant defence called forth a most eulogistic order from the
Commander-in-Chief. The success had come at a time when it was badly
needed. The guarding of the railways necessitated the splitting-up of
forces, and in more than one recent instance a commander of less
foresight than Major English had failed to realise the responsibility
of his position, with the result that more additions were made to the
already-far-too-long list of 'regrettable incidents.'

The following telegrams passed between General Hart and Major
English:--

Helio message received at Zuikerbosch Fort on July 22nd, 1900, from
General Hart: 'Received following wire from Lord Roberts.
Begins--"Please convey my congratulations to Major English, and all
concerned on the gallant manner in which they defended their post on
the Zuikerbosch."'

Major English made the following reply:--'All in the Zuikerbosch
command thank our General for forwarding Lord Roberts' telegram, which
they consider a great honour.'

The following is an extract from Army Orders in South Africa, dated
Pretoria, July 26th, 1900:--

'_Engagement._--The Field-Marshal Commanding-in-Chief desires that the
following account from Major-General A. Fitzroy Hart, C.B., Commanding
5th Brigade, of the successful defence of a post by a small force of
infantry against a determined attack of the enemy with guns, be
published as an example of what can be accomplished by a small body of
resolute men, well commanded and skilfully and judiciously
entrenched:--

'From General Hart, Zuikerbosch, to Lord Roberts, Pretoria, July 21st:
"Enemy made a determined attempt to destroy my advanced post at
Railhead, Zuikerbosch, to-day. Major English, Royal Dublin Fusiliers,
commands the post, with two companies of Dublins, ten Yeomanry, and
110 Royal Engineer reparation party, defending the new railway bridge
which replaces destroyed one. Boers began attack at daybreak with two
or three guns and a pompom, shelling the position hard. They then
advanced, and completely surrounded him with mauser fire, keeping it
up from 6.20 a.m. to 11.45 a.m., and it was hotly returned. English
signalled early to me at Heidelberg, thirteen miles off, that he was
surrounded, and holding his own confidently. I started from Heidelberg
with two guns, a pompom, 130 Somersets, and 140 Marshall's Horse and
Yeomanry, and, on approaching English's position, found he had already
beaten off the enemy, and saw them assembled on the heights N.E. of
his position, and beginning to ride off N.E. My guns opened fire, and
Boers broke into a gallop. The complete repulse of the Boer attack is
entirely due to the skill with which Major English had fortified his
position, his vigilant arrangements, and the good fighting of the
garrison. Casualties: wounded--Lieutenant Greig, severely; Privates
Mallon, Stanton, and O'Brien, slightly. The bridge and train not
injured. Line only injured to the extent of three rails taken up.
Numbers of enemy's casualties not known. Boers sent out an ambulance
for wounded, and were seen burying dead."'

The following extracts from a letter from Sapper F. Adcock, published
in a home newspaper, are also of interest. After a brief description
of the situation, he continues:--'It was at this time that the
heliographers of the Dublin's showed their pluck, for, fixing up their
stand amidst shot and shell, they got their message through to
Heidelberg.... We could watch every move of the Dublins, as the ditch
ran in the line of their kopje.... Another bit of pluck well worth
seeing happened just as there was a lull in the firing. Two of the
Dublins ran from their entrenchments to their tents, quite a quarter
of a mile, and carried all their bread in a blanket between them to
the entrenchments. The Boers fired three shells at them when they were
going back, but two fell short, and the other was right between them.'

The sapper was right, and it is pleasant to read letters like the
above when emanating from an entirely independent source. Major
English reported most favourably of the signalling, which was
necessarily conducted practically in the open, the enemy's projectiles
falling all round the operator and Major English, who stood close
beside him. For this service Private Farrelly, who sent the message,
was awarded the distinguished conduct medal. The two brave men who
went out for the bread were Privates Hayes ('A' company) and Townsell
('E' company).

The remainder of our stay at Heidelberg was uneventful except for what
might very easily have been a most unpleasant accident. We were all
seated at lunch one day when there was a sudden and loud report close
at hand. Investigation proved that it came from Captain Pomeroy's
revolver (an officer belonging to a West Indian Regiment who was
attached to us). He had carelessly left it in his tent loaded, while
his servant had still more carelessly fired it off. The only sufferer
was an unfortunate animal, Major Bird's charger, which was shot in the
hoof.

On our departure on the 27th, Major-General Cooper's Brigade took over
the defence of the town.

[Illustration: The Officers' Mess.]

[Illustration: Position at Zuikerbosch. 12 m. below Heidleburg;
attacked on 21st July by 1000 Boers with 4 guns. Defended by 180. 2
R.D.F, 110 Engineers, 10 Yeomen, no guns.

Under Major English 2 R.D.F.

_From a sketch by Col. H. Tempest Hicks, C.B._]




CHAPTER III.

AFTER DE WET.

  'It is vain for you to rise up early.'--_Ps._ cxxvii. 2.


Having been for a month at Heidelberg, we had begun to quite make it
our own, and felt as if we should finish the war where we were. And
although there were still any amount of commandoes in the field, we
could scarcely be blamed for thinking that the back of the business
was broken, and that a few weeks, or at the outside months, must see
us returning to England. Well, we reckoned without our host, or rather
the hosts of Messrs. Botha, De Wet, De la Rey, & Co., and if we made a
mistake we made it in good company.

The Colonel had never ceased fortifying and improving Dublin Hill, and
there is no doubt that at the end of July his efforts had resulted in
a very sound and efficient post.

Everything pointed to peace and quiet when, late on the afternoon of
July 27th, the ominous 'order' call broke the stillness of the crisp
wintry evening.

'Come for orders! Come for orders! Hurry up, hurry up; come for
orders!'

Who, that soldiered through those long weary months, but must remember
that infernal call? For it was characteristic of the war, and owing,
doubtless, to the immense tract of country over which it was waged,
that not only the rank and file, but even the officers, with one or
two exceptions, knew little or nothing of what was going on.
Consequently one never knew what the next minute would bring forth,
and waited accordingly with ears at tension for the strains of the
bugle, whose notes might portend nothing or everything.

On this occasion they were the prelude to one of the most stirring
periods in the history of the war--the first great De Wet hunt. It is
beside the purport of this volume to discuss the advantages of British
infantry pursuing mounted Boers. It has often been maintained that the
result of such an apparently hopeless hare-and-tortoise sort of
procedure would have been successful on this occasion but for the fact
of the unblocking of Olifant's Nek. On the other hand, there are not
wanting many who are equally prepared to argue that, although this
bolt-hole being open may have facilitated the guerilla's escape, that
astute leader would easily have found some other nook or cranny quite
sufficient for his purpose had it been shut; while, if the worst had
come to the worst, from his point of view, he could, at the sacrifice
of his waggons and guns, have dissolved his commando in the night,
only to unite again at some more suitable and less column-infected
time and place.

At the time we knew nothing of all this; all we knew was that some big
move was in progress, for, as we neared the railway next day, train
after train steamed through, reminiscent of the vicinity of Epsom on a
Derby Day, but that was all. Where we were going, when we were going,
why we were going, were all questions quite beyond our ken--not to be
answered, indeed, until some days later, when an officer on General
Hunter's Staff told us what it was all about.

Our march to the railway on the 28th was a long and trying one,
variously computed at from twenty-one to twenty-three miles. Whatever
its exact length may have been is immaterial; it was the method in
which it was conducted that was so desperately trying. After the usual
sketchy apology for a breakfast, the column moved off with the
Somersets as advance-guard, and 'F' and 'G' company of the Dublins as
rearguard. From a variety of causes the progress was uncommonly slow,
and, no halt being made of greater length than a few minutes, the men
of the rearguard had a trying time, for any one who has marched
behind a column of waggons, &c., miles in length, knows that one
practically gets no halt at all from these five-minute snatches, owing
to the necessity of continually closing up. It was quite dark when the
rearguard hove in sight of the passing trains, and then, to make
matters thoroughly uncomfortable, some half-dozen waggons stuck firmly
in a snipe-bog, scarcely a mile from their destination.

[Illustration: Corporal Tierney and Chef Burst.]

It looked uncommonly as if the unfortunate rearguard would have to
bivouac in that miserable marsh. As everybody was pouring with
perspiration from their endeavours with the waggons, and as it was
beginning to freeze, while there was no chance of getting at
great-coats, blankets, or food unless the waggons came out, out they
jolly well had to come--and came. It was ten o'clock before the men
got anything to eat, and 11.30 p.m. before our arrangements for the
night were completed. Our invaluable French 'chef' had kept some hot
soup for the rearguard, and seldom was soup more appreciated than by
those famished and frozen warriors.

We now heard that we were going south, and going south by train, and
that at all events was something to look forward to. At least it was a
change--something to look forward to with anticipation; and certainly
it is something to look back upon with a certain amount of amusement,
but at the time that railway journey was certainly the reverse of
comfortable.

We could not get off as early as we expected to on the 29th. The first
train started all right, but owing to the amount of work to be done in
getting kit over a small drift that lay between our bivouac of the
night before and the station, the second train did not follow it till
3.30 p.m.

After this the difficulty of dispatch increased with each succeeding
train, until when it came to entraining reluctant horses and still
more reluctant mules practically in the dark, for there was no other
light but the dim glimmer of two candle-lamps, the task became
herculean, and required an infinity of patience and tact. The General
and his staff having gone by the first excursion, the task of bringing
along the remainder of the column devolved on Colonel Hicks, with
Captain Fetherstonhaugh as his staff officer. They did not complete
the entraining until the early hours of the 30th, and then only to
find the line blown up in front of them. The fact that no disaster
occurred here was owing to Colonel Hicks' determination not to try to
get through that night, as he clearly foresaw what actually took
place, and that there was nothing to prevent the enemy blowing up the
line.

It is necessary now to turn our attention to the second train, which
conveyed most of the regiment, under command of Major Bird. Some forty
men with their arms and accoutrements were told off to each open
truck, necessitating the tightest packing, which, however, had a
beneficial effect in so far as it took off the worst part of the
constant succession of jerks and jolts which the journey consisted of.
But everybody was full of fun, and the men as merry as crickets at the
change from the long days of uninteresting 'foot-slogging' and the
prospect of a brush with the elusive De Wet.

The officers--about twenty in number--travelled in the guard's van, on
the floor of which they made themselves as comfortable as possible
under the circumstances.

[Illustration: Fourth Class on the Z.A.S.M.]

After passing Vereeniging and duly admiring the excellent work of the
sappers, the mess-president proposed that they should sample the
hampers he had provided for them. This was carried unanimously, but at
that moment the train began to slow up, and, anxious to see every new
place, we determined to wait until the train started again, and then
enjoy our dinner in peace and comfort.

The sudden explosion of a shell from 'Long Tom' in our midst could not
have had a more demoralising effect than the news which greeted us
when we came to a standstill. It arrived in the shape of a telegram
from the General, ordering the officers to ride in the trucks with the
men, and to keep a sharp look-out for attacks from both sides. So
there was no chance of any dinners after all, and all our visions of
chicken and tongue, whisky and sparklets, and a hot cup of tea or
chocolate resolved themselves into a lump of chocolate out of one's
haversack and a pull at one's water-bottle. The mess-president proved
himself a man of resource on this trying occasion. With hunger gnawing
at his vitals he saw a beautiful dinner laid out in a waiting-room for
some staff officers. Unable to satisfy his comrades he saw no reason
why he himself should go unsatisfied, and in the three or four minutes
occupied by the engine in watering he hastily bolted a fine plate of
roast beef and potatoes, not omitting a bottle of beer standing hard
by, and jumped into the train at the last moment, thanking his
astonished host and friend, Major Hickie of the 7th Fusiliers, as the
train moved off into the darkness.

Anything more cheerless than the remainder of that night journey it
would be hard to conceive. In the first place, when there are forty
men in an open truck, it is very difficult to find room for two more.
In the second place, it was bitterly cold, and a pitch-dark night. In
the third place, the even-money chance of a slab or two of gun-cotton
on the line ahead was not a pleasing one to contemplate. In the fourth
place, the men were ordered to 'charge magazines,' and to spend
several hours jolting along with the cold barrel of a loaded rifle
poking one in the ribs, or insinuatingly tucking itself into the nape
of one's neck, could by no stretch of imagination or fire-eating
ambition be called comforting. However, there was one fine piece of
news at any rate to act as a compensation, the surrender of Commandant
Prinsloo and three or four thousand men to General Hunter.

[Illustration: Fifth Class on the Z.A.S.M.]

Once or twice ghostly forms on horseback loomed suddenly out of the
blackness of the veld, momentarily lit up by the glare from the
engine. On each occasion they shouted some warning, but what it was
nobody could make out. Our engine-driver fully expected to be blown
up, and had taken the bit between his teeth, cracking on at a pace
that stirred up the living contents of the trucks behind him, until
if any one of them had had a spare morsel of fat on him, he must
inevitably have been churned into butter. Carrying on at this rate, we
soon arrived at our destination, a small station called Kopjes. And
when very shortly after our arrival two or three dull explosions in
the direction whence we had come signified that the line had been
blown up right enough, our gratitude to the engine-driver was
considerably increased. Nor did his solicitude for our welfare end
even then, for having effected his object, he said we could have as
much boiling water out of the engine as we liked, and in less than
sixty seconds we were drinking steaming hot chocolate, and returning
grateful thanks to our host. If any one class more than another
deserved special recognition during this war, it was the railway
staff--the drivers, stokers, and guards. It is no exaggeration to say
that during the whole war no train was ever run at night but that
these men did not run the risk of being blown sky-high, in addition to
all the other incidental dangers of their hazardous calling.

The break in the line necessitated our waiting some two or three days
at the station, until the remainder of the column got through. When it
was at last assembled, we marched off due west, towards the sound of
heavy firing in the distance. A march of fourteen miles brought us
within sight and almost within range of a long, low line of kopjes,
and here, we were informed on our arrival, was the famous guerilla
chief, surrounded--so we were informed--at last, and only awaiting the
arrival of our column to be finished off altogether. Without going so
far as some of the subalterns, who on hearing he was surrounded seemed
to anticipate the sight of De Wet in the middle of a sort of cock-pit,
with the British forces sitting round, there still seemed a
considerable number of sufficiently large gaps in the chain of columns
and brigades slowly and ponderously extending round either flank of
the Boer position. The firing we had heard had been from the Boer
guns, they having shelled the Derbyshire Regiment out of their camp,
which had been pitched imprudently close to the harmless-looking
kopjes. Needless to say, there was not a move of any sort to be seen,
and how on earth three or four thousand men managed to conceal
themselves so absolutely must ever remain a marvel. True, their camp
was beyond the crest-line, but it is certain they had outposts and
sentries on the look-out, and these must of necessity have been posted
where they could see us; but certain it was we could not see them,
carefully as telescopes and Zeiss glasses swept every inch of the
hills.

Unfortunately we had to leave eighty-nine men behind at the railway,
as they had no boots, a serious matter with every probability of a
stiff fight on our hands: for General Hart's orders were to prevent De
Wet going south; to attack, if necessary, to make him go north, but
not to allow him to go in any other direction. This being so, our
object was effected, as will appear later on.

Another and equally sudden interruption to a meal took place on
August 1st. Marshall's Horse, a Colonial corps of whom we saw a good
deal, had gone out on a reconnaissance in the morning, and had some
scrapping with the enemy's patrols, &c. But now word suddenly came
that they were surrounded, and in a tight corner. Hastily dropping
knives and forks, we fell in almost at the double, and, though
somewhat struck by the incongruity and apparent anomaly in the fact of
our cavalry being surrounded by the Boers when we had been distinctly
informed that it was we who were surrounding them, set off as hard as
we could lay legs to the ground. After marching between four and five
miles, well within the hour, we met the doctor of our mounted corps,
who said he had been taken prisoner and released, and that there was
no necessity for going any further, as our friends had beaten off our
enemies and were on their way back. So back we trudged too, meeting on
the way what most of us thought was a squadron of cavalry, but which
turned out to be Brigadier-General Little's cavalry brigade. The sight
of the attenuation of this force afforded us food for reflection, and
made some of us begin to understand a little how it was that, in spite
of our magnificent paper forces, we still found such difficulty in
rounding-up our foes.

The next three or four days were uneventful. Lord Kitchener arrived
and took over the chief command of all the forces, which now really
seemed to be closing in on De Wet. The noose was being drawn tighter
and tighter daily, and the Boers' position became more and more
precarious. What would have happened but for Lord Kitchener's arrival
it is hard to say, as General Hart, ever impatient of passivity, a
very Ney for pertinacity of attack, personal bravery, and confidence
in his troops, was undoubtedly on the eve of launching an attack. But
in the light of the succeeding events, it is clear now that such an
attack would have been premature and ill-timed. In the event of its
non-success--and we had a very small force to carry it out with--the
general operations would have been completely ruined, for we being
the Southern force, there would have been nothing to prevent De Wet
going south. In the event of success it would merely have meant that
the Boers would have slipped away north two or three days sooner than
they did, when, seeing that our arrangements to intercept them were
not even then complete, an earlier start would have enabled them to
carry out their retreat with even greater ease.

Major King, of General Hunter's staff, now arrived in camp with a Boer
prisoner, one of Prinsloo's staff. The latter was being sent through
with a message to De Wet, informing him of the full magnitude of the
Boer surrender at Golden Gate, and advocating his own relinquishment
of further operations. They went through to the Boers' position, and
were courteously received, but General De Wet declared it was
impossible for him to think of giving up now, as he had President
Steyn with him. Nobody believed in the excuse, and its purport is
somewhat difficult to understand, but it ended the conference, and
Major King and his prisoner returned to camp.

Major English, whose eye had proved troublesome and kept him behind,
now rejoined the battalion, to everybody's gratification, for the
publication of Lord Roberts's army order, which took place at this
time, had made us all very proud of him and his men.

On the 5th an order was given to send out a small force, consisting of
two companies of the regiment, a pompom, and a troop of Marshall's
Horse, to a point five miles N.N.E. of the camp, in order to fill up a
somewhat big gap between General Hart and the 3rd Cavalry Brigade. 'B'
and 'G' companies, under an officer of the regiment, with Captain
Nelson, R.M.L.I., and Lieutenants Smith and Molony as subalterns, and
Lieutenant Nek of Marshall's Horse, were selected, and started as soon
as the men's dinners were finished. General Hart rode out later on,
and, catching this force up, selected a site, and gave orders to the
officer commanding it to dig himself in, promising that the pompom,
which had not turned up, should be sent on.

In the meantime the remainder of General Hart's force also started
digging, a very different state of affairs to his premeditated attack
a couple of days earlier.

The detachment sent out patrols on the morning of the 6th to see if
they could draw the enemy's fire, with strict injunctions to content
themselves with doing so and then withdraw. This they soon succeeded
in doing. On their return they passed a farmhouse, and received
information that an important Boer General was in the habit of
sleeping there sometimes. Visions of a capture of De Wet inflamed the
minds of some of the younger officers, and on the night of the 6th-7th
Captain Nelson and Lieutenant Smith, with a few picked men, made a
raid on the house. However, they found nobody but womenfolk, and
returned empty-handed.

Next day commenced our memorable pursuit. De Wet and his merry men had
slipped away over the ford bearing his own name as neatly as a
cherry-stone from between finger and thumb, and, with their heads
turned north, were to give us, and many another converging column like
us, the hunt of our lives. The regiment started at 11.30 and only
halted at dusk, some three miles from a range of hills on which rumour
said the Boers were going to stand and fight it out to the bitter end,
even if the whole British Army came against them. 'B' and 'G'
companies did not get in until 9 p.m., as, in addition to having an
extra five miles to march, they had some trouble with their waggons.

We marched all day on the 8th in an easterly direction along the left
or southern bank of the Vaal River--a long, tiring, uneventful trek.
Expecting momentarily to see our prey delivered over to us, our
spirits sank lower and lower as the day dragged on with no sign of any
Boers. There was the usual aggravating little drift to be negotiated
at 6 p.m. only half a mile short of our camping-ground for the night,
but eventually we got all the waggons over, and men and officers
obtained something to eat. This proved one of the coldest nights of
the winter, and there was ice instead of water in most of the
water-bottles next morning when reveille went at 3.30 a.m.

Starting at 5 a.m. we again went steadily on till 6 p.m., making well
over thirteen hours without food. We skirted round the south of Parys,
a name which appealed strongly to a good many of us, and suddenly
heard the welcome sound of heavy firing not very far ahead. The column
halted, and word soon came that this time our pains were really to be
rewarded; the Boers were only six miles ahead, and Lord Methuen was
engaged with their rearguard. All signs of hunger and fatigue at once
disappeared, the regiment started trekking off once more,
instinctively 'stepping out' as they went. The guns still thundered
invitingly just ahead, and as we topped each fresh horizon or rounded
the slope of the next kopje we all expected to see our prey close in
front. But it was not to be. As the afternoon wore on the sound of the
guns died away, until at last we came to a halt at dusk in a sort of
amphitheatre among the low hills. Too tired to want much food, the men
sank down with the delightful nightcap that reveille might again be
expected at 3.30 a.m.

The 10th proved more or less a repetition of the preceding days.
Starting at 5 a.m., we did not halt till well after dark, the waggons,
kits, food, &c., not getting up to us till 10 p.m. Seeing that there
was no chance of any other food, some bullocks were commandeered, and
the men cooked them in little chunks in their mess-tins over the grass
fires. Tired out as they were it was too cold to get any sleep without
blankets, and long lines of melancholy soldiers could be seen standing
along the edges of the grass fires, against which their figures were
outlined in bold silhouette, and from whose scanty flames they
endeavoured to get what little warmth they could. Everybody was wet
through to the knee, a good many to the waist, while some were soused
all over, for in the course of our march we had turned due north, and
crossed the Vaal at Lindeque Drift. The river is very broad here, and
split up into numerous small streams, in the wading of which many
humorous incidents took place, owing to the slippery nature of the
rolling stones in the bottom of the river. A rolling stone may not
gather much moss, but it is undoubtedly capable of gathering a
considerable quantity of slimy weeds, and when concealed by two or
three feet of running water it offers about as precarious a footing as
it is possible to imagine.

[Illustration: The Vaal River, Lindeque Drift.]

Winding our way through the low hills on the Transvaal side of the
river, we at length emerged on to an enormous plain. The far horizon
was bounded by the Gatsrand hills, with which, as with another
detached clump of rounded kopjes on our left, known as the Losberg, we
were destined ere long to become closely acquainted. As we finally
turned in about 11 p.m. we heard reveille was not to sound till 4.30
a.m., but when some subaltern attempted a feeble joke about a 'Europe
morning,' his effort met with nothing but silent contempt.

There is little doubt that any one who shared in that next day's march
will never forget it. As we proceeded across the illimitable plain a
strong head-wind began to blow, increasing in strength as the day wore
on. De Wet had fired all the grass ahead of us, with the result that
the air was laden with millions and millions of particles of minute
ashes and sharp cinders. These soon filled eyes, ears, nostrils,
throats, and lungs, until breathing became well-nigh impossible, and
the agony caused by their penetration into our eyes almost
intolerable. But woe to him who endeavoured to alleviate his distress
by wiping his eyes with grimy hands. Such action merely had the effect
of 'rubbing it in,' and so accentuating the misery and discomfort. The
men very soon began to fall out in ever-increasing numbers. On one
occasion Captain Nelson, R.M.L.I., was seen straggling off right away
from the column. Lieutenant Bradford went after him and found that he
was temporarily quite blind. At last, after hours of torment, we
reached a pass in the Gatsrand, on the far side of which we halted, as
night fell. A big grass fire almost immediately broke out, and as the
grass was long and thick, and a strong wind still blew to fan it,
things looked very ugly. The flames swept right through the camp, but
luckily the tents were not up. But what would happen when they reached
the guns and ammunition? What, indeed, might have happened, but for
the gallantry of the gunners and naval detachment, it is hard to say.
As it was the ammunition-waggons caught fire and were sufficiently
charred to demonstrate the closeness of the danger. But, as ever, 'the
handy-man' was to the fore, and with promptitude and courage, that
could not have been excelled, managed to extinguish the flames.

And now for a wash--what, no water! No water, which, hungry and
exhausted as they were, every one wanted even more than food. But,
alas! it was too true, and after contenting ourselves with some liquid
mud, flavoured with charcoal, called coffee, and some few mouthfuls
of tough old trek-ox, liberally peppered with burnt grass, we only
waited to hear that reveille was to be at 1.30 a.m. before sinking
down to snatch what rest was possible. This delightful spot rejoiced
in the refreshing name of Orange Grove.

The 12th of August. Shade of St. Grouse! At 3 a.m. we were on the move
in bright moonlight and sharp frost, with a wind blowing which cut
like a knife. After doing some sixteen or seventeen miles we arrived
about 10 a.m. at Wolverdiend station--a large force of cavalry and
infantry assembled there, moving out as we moved in. Camp was pitched,
and a good meal cooked--our first respectable one for three days--and
then--then came the order to start off again in the afternoon. Wearily
we resumed that march, but even as we started the prospect was
brightened by the sound of heavy guns ahead, on our right front. We
finally bivouacked for the night on the most stony kopje in all South
Africa. It was impossible to find a spot anywhere that did not consist
of sharp, jagged rocks, rendering sleep, to any troops less tired than
we were, an utter impossibility. A rumour credited Lord Methuen with
again having brought De Wet to bay, and we were almost positively
assured that next day would end our laborious march.

No less than ten mules were lost during the day, from utter
exhaustion. Many a heart, weary in itself, ached yet more deeply for
the sufferings entailed on the dumb animals.

Reveille at 2, off at 3, was our time-table for the next day. After
proceeding some five or six miles, the force came to the pretty little
Mooi River. The Colonel found an excellent place for us to cross it,
compared to the spot where the Somersets were obliged to plunge in. A
halt was called on the far side, and a scratch meal taken. While thus
employed, some of our troops who had been De Wet's prisoners, amongst
them a couple of our own men, came in. They had been with De Wet's
rearguard, and told us that when Lord Methuen had shelled it the day
before, they had managed to escape; also that the fire of Lord
Methuen's guns had knocked over a Boer gun and exploded one of their
ammunition waggons. They added that De Wet was in command of a very
considerable force, and some distance ahead.

[Illustration: The R.D.F. bathing in Mooi River, Potchefstroom.]

We presently resumed the pursuit, finally camping in some very
desolate country, where the water was scarce and bad. Signs of
over-fatigue and want of sleep were now becoming very apparent, a
large number of men falling out and riding on the waggons. Poor
fellows! they stuck it out as long as ever they could, but their socks
gave out from the constant wettings, and they pitched them away,
marching on in their boots until the pain of the raw chafes became too
much to bear. There was never a grumble or complaint: a man simply
asked to see his Captain, and respectfully said his feet had given
way, and he must regretfully fall out. The officers knew it was true,
and felt for their comrades whose emaciated kits precluded the
possibility of a change. To such a state was the column now reduced
that the General, who had ordered reveille for 2 a.m. the following
morning, actually put it back till 6 o'clock.

The regiment acted as rearguard on the 14th, and did not start till 9
a.m., halting for a short time at mid-day near a blown-up Boer
ammunition waggon. Every conceivable sort and kind of small-arm
ammunition lay scattered around on the veld, and those who were keen
on curios of this description made quite a collection of full and
empty cases.

The battalion lost eleven more mules, the poor brutes simply falling
to the ground from utter exhaustion, being perforce left where they
lay. We arrived in camp at 5.30 p.m., and then for the first time, in
at all events some of our lives, heard two reveilles in one day, the
hated call blaring in our ears at 10.30 p.m. Starting at 12, we pushed
on, belts tightened, teeth clenched, and simply determined _not_ to
give in. We were told that the cavalry brigades had De Wet at last at
the foot of the Magaliesberg, only sixteen miles ahead. So on we went
into the sheer and bitter night, more like ghostly shadows than
anything else, as the spectral column wound its way through sleeping
villages and over mile after mile of dark and silent veld. At last our
eyes were gladdened by the sight of twinkling watch-fires on the
slopes of some hills just ahead, and as the first signs of dawn began
to become manifest, we sank wearily down to enjoy a few minutes'
repose. But it was broad daylight when we woke, and alas! for all the
hopes of the past eight days, the hills ahead were only occupied by
our cavalry. Theirs had been the watch-fires of the dark hours of the
night. The game was up, and we were told the first great De Wet hunt
was over. Some one had failed to stop the earth; the fox had foiled
his pursuers, and the various Generals reluctantly whipped off their
hounds.

It was a bitter disappointment. We had been so buoyed up by the
promises held out to us. Every one had so thoroughly entered into the
job, and plodded stolidly along; and all for nothing. Work which, if
successful, would have lived in history, but which, being
unsuccessful, was fated to be forgotten and ignored; and unsuccessful
through no fault of any of the troops engaged in it. There was no
General or Staff to blame: no regiment or department which could be
hauled over the coals. No; some one had blundered, that was all. The
point has never been exactly cleared up, and probably never will be,
and there the matter ended.

  'Lay not your blame on me: if you have lost him,
  Why, I have lost him too.'--_Othello._

So we turned over and fell asleep again, and woke up at 9 a.m. and had
some breakfast, and were about to fall asleep again when the word came
to fall in and march on to some other bivouac. The one we were in was
good enough for us, but of course there was nothing for it but to
obey, and we marched to a small village called Rietfontein. Here we
heard that Colonel Hore's column was surrounded, and in a bad way,
some eighty miles off, and that we were to form part of a small force,
and make a forced march to his relief.

Accordingly the column marched at 8 a.m. next morning. After going
about two miles, an order arrived saying we were to go back; and back
we went--a somewhat profitless proceeding, but doubtless unavoidable.
The remainder of the day was spent resting, but it was known that
reveille was to sound at midnight, and that we were to make a big
effort next day.

Starting at 1 a.m., and steadily tramping on till 9.30 a.m., we put
twenty miles behind us. A halt was then made for a meal in rather a
pretty spot, which actually boasted of some trees sufficiently large
to afford shade, and under the foot of some well-wooded kloofs on our
right. Resuming our march, we did some two or three miles more when
word came that Colonel Hore was all right, having made a most gallant
resistance and suffered many casualties, and that we were to go back
the way we had come and march to Pretoria.

By the time we got back to our bivouac it was still early in the day,
and we had already marched twenty-five miles. Five more mules had
fallen dead, making a total of thirty-eight since we started on the
7th.

On the 18th we resumed our return journey, if return journey it could
be called, since wherever we were going it was a hundred to one
against its being the place we had come from. After a short trek we
out-spanned for breakfasts, and an order was then given that we were
to stay where we were and bivouac there for the night.

We moved to Vlakfontein next day, a distance of about sixteen miles,
and the march quite uneventful. Rumour, however, pointed to
Krugersdorp as our destination, and this must have been the exception
that proves the rule, for on this occasion rumour proved right.

Another long and equally uninteresting march of eighteen or nineteen
miles, only relieved by the arrival in hot haste of an indignant
Marquis. It appeared he had been at a farm some two miles off on our
left front, and had been offered some tea, which he had refused, and
on leaving the house had been shot at by about a dozen Boers. What it
was all about, or what he had been doing alone at this farm, and why
the Boers should not shoot at him when he withdrew, none of us could
quite make out. However, there were some Boers there, so the Colonel
fired a few long-range volleys in the direction indicated, but
declined to make a deviation with a view to reprisals.

Another eighteen miles on the 31st brought us to within about eight of
Krugersdorp. About time too, for the men's boots were giving way
badly, and scarcely one in ten had any socks.

The eight miles proved to be very long ones, however--longer than even
Irish miles--and although we had made an early start, it was noon
before we at last reached Krugersdorp for the second time. On this
occasion we halted on a hillside just outside the north of the town,
and beside a sort of small suburb on the further side of the creek.

Since leaving Heidelberg we had marched 289 miles. But of this
distance 123 had been covered in the week during which we pursued De
Wet, and 228 in the fortnight commencing August 7th. The longest
distance covered in any one day had been the 25 miles on the day we
turned. This marching was not done on roads it must be remembered, but
across country, over hills, and through rivers, with frequent troubles
with the unfortunate transport to overcome, and with very little food,
and that of an inferior quality.

So ended our attempt on foot to catch De Wet on a thoroughbred. It was
hopeless from the first, and yet went within measurable distance of
succeeding, though even if we had rounded up some of his force at
Olifant's Nek, it is very doubtful if De Wet himself would have been
caught.




CHAPTER IV.

SEPTEMBER IN THE GATSRAND.

  'Why gaddest thou about so much?'

                              _Jer._ ii. 36.


From August 23rd to 28th we obtained a very welcome week's rest, which
would have been more enjoyable had the weather not broken badly,
resulting in a succession of cold, high winds and heavy thunderstorms.
These latter were of the most abominable description and a severe
trial to those of us whose nervous systems were so constituted as to
be affected by them. Some declared that they liked them; others
frankly admitted that they detested them. They seemed to have a way of
coming along about 4 p.m., and as soon as they got into position,
immediately above our heads, opened fire. Needless to say, in the
course of the long campaign there were a good many very narrow shaves,
and one of our men was actually killed by lightning. The storms were
almost invariably accompanied by torrential rain, which, though adding
greatly to our discomfort, mitigated the danger, the local cognoscenti
assuring us that even they looked upon a dry thunderstorm as no joke.

The regiment was a good deal split up at this time owing to the men we
had dropped behind us on our late trek; they had fallen out from a
variety of causes, but ninety per cent. of them on account of sore
feet or lack of boots. There were no less than 160 at Wolverdiend, 50
at Rhenoster, 40 at Wolverhoek, and so on. The Colonel made many
attempts to gather up his chickens once more, but when we started on
our next trek we were still deficient of a good many. Major Bird left
us at this time to go to Natal, where he was to arrange about our
property, and organize orderly-room papers, etc. Major English was
unfortunately down with a severe attack of dysentery, and had it not
been for Major Rutherford's arrival on the morning of the 29th the
battalion would have been Majorless. Our padre, Father Mathews,
presented us with a very fine pair of koodoo horns which he picked up
at a store while we were here. He had originally been attached to the
Royal Irish Fusiliers, but had come to us after Nicholson's Nek. He
remained with us till the end of the war, and proved himself a brave
soldier and a welcome member of the mess.

[Illustration: Father Mathews.]

Orders were eventually issued for a start at 6 a.m. on the morning of
the 29th, but a night of heavy rain and succession of thunderstorms
put an early start out of the question, and we did not get off till 3
p.m. The force was known as the Pochefstroom Column,[11] and our
mission, as far as we knew, was to lay waste the country between
Krugersdorp and that place, to fight the enemy whenever we met him,
to bring in women and children, to destroy anything in the way of
forage, &c., which might be useful to our enemies, if we could not
bring it along for our own use; to collect waggons, cape-carts,
animals, harness, &c.; and generally to carry fire and sword
throughout the land.

         [Footnote 11: South Wales Borderers, Royal Dublin Fusiliers,
         half-battalion Somersetshire Light Infantry, 4·7 Naval Gun,
         28th Battery Royal Field Artillery, Marshall's Horse, and
         Yeomanry.]

Moving off in a southerly direction through the town, we came to what
should have been a harmless little drift, about two or three miles
out. The recent rains had, however, transformed it into a formidable
obstacle, and waggon after waggon stuck hopelessly in its miry
embrace. The General, therefore, determined to halt on a rising slope
on the far side, and as many waggons as possible were man-handled over
the bog. Tents were pitched, but scarcely were they up when a furious
storm burst overhead. In a minute everything and everybody was soused
through and through, the scene being vividly lit up by the almost
continuous flashes of vivid lightning, while the crashing, bellowing
boom of the thunder in our ears made voices inaudible and orders
perfectly useless. What sort of teas the regimental cooks prepared we
did not know, but the invaluable and ubiquitous Corporal Tierney
managed to bring each of us a cup of hot tea and a rasher or a steak
in our tents. The storm lasted till dawn, when the heavy clouds, as if
despoiled of their victims by the rising sun, reluctantly drew off
northwards. A glorious morning was the consequence, but, of course,
there was no chance of trekking for some hours to come.

At 2 p.m. a start was again made, but as the tents and everything else
were soaked through, and weighed fifty per cent. more than they would
under ordinary circumstances, there was little hope that our transport
animals would be able to drag them through any bad drifts. We only
managed to do some seven miles before darkness came on, when we camped
for the night at the Madeline Gold-mine. It was jumpy work here, as
the whole place was honeycombed with prospecting-holes and ditches,
varying in depth from three feet to about three hundred. How on earth
no one fell in must ever remain a mystery, as, to add to the
delightful freshness of the situation, a large herd of bullocks took
command, and meandered through the camp, one of which moved the mess
president on some considerable distance, fortunately for him with a
horn on each side of him, instead of one through him, as was doubtless
intended.

We marched from the Madeline at 7 a.m. on August 31st, and after
trekking some miles arrived at a large coal-mine, which seemed to be
in very good order. This country had been the scene of a goodish bit
of fighting. Not far off the ill-fated Jameson raid had come to its
inglorious conclusion; a little further on the Gordons had suffered
severely during the advance on Johannesburg; and here the Pochefstroom
column was to be 'blooded.'

We did not know that anything interesting was on the tapis until we
saw the white cotton-wool puffs of our shrapnel bursting against a
range of kopjes in our front. Then the Colonel told us that there were
supposed to be a good many Boers on ahead, and that the General had
gone off with a portion of the column to attack them, while we were to
advance and seize and hold a nek, with a view to cutting off the
retreating Boers, or threatening their left flank, or reinforcing our
right, or some obscure purpose. It was the same in so many of our days
of scrapping and trekking. Talk about the fog of war: we who were
actually in the battle knew nothing about it. Doubtless the Commanding
Officer was in the know, but the Company Officer, the commander of
what is now recognised as the real fighting unit, he knew nothing. It
was a funny fight. We trekked along, unconcernedly watching the pretty
effect of our friends the gunners' practice; able with glasses to see
the stones and dust driven ahead when the shells burst low; but unable
to see any Boers. On reaching our destined spot we lay down and had
a smoke, and thought of all sorts of things other than fighting, until
at last news came from the General, and we heard we had fifteen
casualties. So it had been quite a battle after all, as fights were
going in those days, when any scrap that resulted in a casualty was
known as a hardly-contested engagement.

On the 1st we moved to a rather pretty camp, close under the far side
of the hills, called Jakfontein. The General and the troops he had
with him on the 31st arrived at about 5.15 p.m., and camped alongside.
The General told the Colonel they had had quite a victory yesterday,
driving the Boers from their position, and occupying it at nightfall.
They also thought they had done a good deal of damage to them with our
guns, as they withdrew.

The column did not march on the 2nd, but two companies ('E' and 'F')
under Captain Shewan proceeded to Bank Station as escort to the
wounded, while two more ('A' and 'B'), under Major Rutherford, were
sent off to commence the burning and looting, which, as far as we
could understand, was the _raison d'être_ of the column. However that
might be, there was a tremendous fuss on their return, and all sorts
of accusations made _re_ looting. There is no disguising the fact that
we were altogether too squeamish, and that the orders on these and
subsequent occasions were capable of more than one interpretation.
Here were we in an enemy's country, badly off for a cart, let us say,
for the officers' mess; the very thing is found in an unoccupied farm;
to bring it along and use it was to loot: to burn it was to obey
orders. At this length of time it is easy to write dispassionately,
and there can be no harm in saying that it was vexing to be found
fault with when under the impression that one was doing one's best for
the general good, and not in any way profiting oneself. A few days
later an officer searching a farm for concealed weapons, &c., came
across a heavy ebony stick--just the thing he wanted. The old Boer
lady made a great fuss about his taking it, saying it was all she had
to beat the Kaffirs with. That finally determined him, more especially
as he was not exactly standing on ceremony at the time, seeing the
next company was being sniped at, and his turn liable to come at any
moment.

Captain G. S. Higginson was appointed Remount officer, and from this
moment we began to lose sight of him, to everybody's great regret.

After spending another day in bringing in forage and supplies, the
column started at 9 p.m. on the 3rd on a night march. For the first
four or five miles all went well, and the advance-guard, under the
careful leading of Captain Romer, maintained the right direction.
Then, however, the road made a sharp turn, and although Captain
Romer's party followed the turn right enough, part of his
advance-guard, under a subaltern, went wandering off into the black
night. It took some time to retrieve them, and as the column
immediately afterwards came to a deep drift, it was considerably
delayed. 'G' company was sent up a high hill on the left to guard that
flank until the whole of the transport and rearguard was past, and the
cold on the top was a thing to remember. The main column got into
bivouac shortly after 1 a.m., but this unfortunate company was out
till 5, which, seeing the march was resumed at 6, was rather hard
luck. However, there was plenty of that going for everybody in those
days, and after the usual short 'grouse,' the sleepless night was
forgotten.

After moving into the hills about eight miles further, and passing
through some beautiful farms, with every peachtree a mass of glorious
bloom, the column halted. The Imperial Yeomanry, who had been scouting
far ahead, now found themselves perilously involved with a small body
of the enemy. General Hart, with a portion of the column, including
the artillery and naval gun, moved out to extricate them, and very
soon we heard heavy fighting going on. He succeeded in his object,
however, at the expense of four of the Yeomanry wounded and one man
killed. In the meantime, Colonel Hicks had thrown out outposts on the
hills, 'G' company coming in for another sleepless night, probably
through some mistake in the roster. Captain Nelson, R.M.L.I.
(attached), had a somewhat peculiar experience. Having been detained
for some purpose when his company was going out, he gave Lieutenant
Marsh, his subaltern, orders where to go, and later on followed
himself. But then he couldn't find them. Nor could the other companies
on other hills see anything of them, though signals were flashed in
the direction they had taken. It was not until next morning that they
were discovered, quite close to the place they had been ordered to go
to. It was characteristic of the nature of the country in which we
were operating, and the excellent manner in which they hid themselves,
that Captain Nelson should have missed them, for at one time he must
have passed quite close to the piquet.

Next morning Boers were reported in the vicinity. It is impossible to
say they were in our front, as our front coincided with the report of
the first visible Boer, and we simply went for anything we saw. Rumour
put this force at 700 strong, but most people considered that an
exaggerated estimate. We moved off in three columns: the South Wales
Borderers took the right, moving along the difficult, serrated tops of
the hills; the cavalry and yeomanry took the lower, more undulating,
easier hills to the left, while the rest of us with the guns moved
along in the centre; the General, conspicuous by a large red flag
which a trooper carried behind him, moving wherever any opposition
presented itself. It must be the unanimous opinion of all troops who
knew our General, that a braver man never fought in action, but at the
same time the man who carried that red flag deserved some honourable
distinction. Perhaps he got it; probably he did not.

After moving some two or three miles, our further way was blocked by
mauser-fire from a very ominous, black-looking kopje which stretched
down into the valley from the high ground on our left. The guns came
into action against this hill at a range of about two thousand yards,
and it seemed as if a golden-crested wren could not have escaped if it
had been unlucky enough to be there. The shrapnel kept up an almost
incessant hail, covering the wooded sides of the kopje with jets of
round white balls of smoke, while every now and then the deeper note
of the 4·7 was followed by a huge cloud of dust and yellowish vapour
thrown up, and off, by the explosion of the lyddite in the huge
projectile. How many Boers held that hill will probably never be
known; only four were found. But a strange spectacle ensued. Emerging
from the cover on the far side, rode, _ventre-à-terre_, a solitary
horseman. Immediately two companies extended in our front opened fire
on him. How he escaped was a marvel, for in front, behind, on every
side of him could be seen 'the bullets kicking dust-spots on the
green.' But escape he did, and many a 'Good luck to you' went after
him, for he was a bold man to have stayed as long as he had, and fully
deserved to escape. Our bombardment had effected one useful purpose.
Amongst the killed was a Commandant called Theron, a brave,
enterprising young fellow of about twenty-five years of age, whose
exploits had already stamped him as a born leader of men. Our own
casualties amounted to four yeomen wounded.

We camped a little further on, and buried our enemy, and one of our
own men who had died from his wounds, side by side, with all due
honour, ceremony, and respect.

[Illustration: Funeral of Commandant Theron and a British Soldier.
September 6th, 1900.]

September 6th was an unpleasant day. In the first place we made a very
early start, which, after the two previous nights' work, was rather
hard on the troops. Several had been without sleep for two nights, and
engaged with the enemy all day. As far as fighting went this
long-range scrapping was not of course worthy of the name, but as far
as discomfort and fatigue were concerned, the operations were entitled
to the most dignified and resonant title in the vocabulary. The 6th
was an example. In the first place there was no fighting; in the
second place, there was very little marching; in the third place,
there was no rest; in the fourth place, there was no food. In the
absence of definite orders the commanding officers delayed for a long
time ere venturing to outspan and cook: when they did do so orders
immediately arrived, scattering companies right, left, and centre, on
the burning and capturing expeditions. Finally, when orders were
published, they were for another night march, the object and
destination of which were concealed even from officers commanding
regiments. However, there was nothing for it but to make the best of
an unpleasant state of affairs, to snatch a few mouthfuls of food
whenever possible and a few minutes' sleep at any opportunity and once
more the long column wound its way through the night. It arrived on
the morning of the 7th at Wolverdiend station, where there was now a
considerable garrison, among them 140 of our own men, who had been
there since the De Wet trek. The day was passed in shifting camp and
fatigue work in the station, where there was much to do in the way of
loading and unloading trains.

Captain Romer got three days' leave here to meet his father, the
famous judge, who had come out as President of the Royal Commission.

At 9 p.m. the column started on another night march, the battalion
supplying the rearguard. It was weary work waiting on those occasions.
Tents were struck, and coats, blankets, &c., packed on the waggons an
hour before the advance-guard was due to march off, after which there
was nothing to do but lie down on the ground in the bitter cold, and
wait till all the transport had got away. Nor did the advance-guard
have very much the best of it, as they of course arrived hours before
the waggons, and had their shivering turn in the early morning, at the
other end of the march.

By 10 a.m. the column arrived at Klerkskraal, a small and very widely
scattered village on the banks of the beautiful Mooi River, a stream
of the clearest and most delicious water. Companies were sent to clear
out the neighbouring farms as usual, and a good deal of information
was gathered about a considerable quantity of the enemy, who had been
trekking through for some time past in small groups.

A dozen fine Indian tents, the gift of Rai Bahadur Boota Singh, of
Rawal Pindi, were handed over to us here for the use of the officers.
Very welcome they proved, as our old ones were nearly worn out.

Sunday, September 9th, 1900, was a day that will live long in the
annals of the battalion. It was given out that in view of the hard
work done by the troops, the day would be treated as a day of rest,
almost immediately following which order came another, detailing two
companies of each corps to go out on the unpleasant foraging duties.
The roster declared that 'G' and 'H' companies were next in
succession, and these two companies started immediately, officers and
men snatching a hasty and very scratch breakfast before starting. They
were out all day, from 8 a.m. to 6 p.m., during which time they were
gathering in supplies of straw, fodder, &c., together with all carts,
waggons, and harness in a serviceable condition, burning such as they
could not carry away with them. At about 5 p.m. a heliograph message
recalled them to camp, in reaching which they had to cross a small
stream with a snipe-marsh on either side: the waggons of course stuck,
but the men set to with a will, impelled doubtless by a keen desire to
get back to their dinners in camp, and dragged them out one by one
with ropes. A dismal surprise was in store for them. For even as they
came in sight of the camp, it was struck, and in place of the dinners
they had so fondly anticipated, some tea alone awaited them. The
officers were even worse off, for as the mess president had been
employed with the two companies out foraging, no one else had thought
of keeping even a cup of tea for them, and, exhausted as they were by
ten hours' work without food, under a burning sun, they received the
pleasing intelligence that the column was starting at once to march to
Pochefstroom, a distance variously estimated at from thirty-five to
thirty-eight miles.

[Illustration: Buffelsdoorn Camp, Gatsrand Hills.]

The force marched in three parts. First, mounted men, guns, and 'A'
and 'E' companies Royal Dublin Fusiliers in waggons. Then the main
body of infantry, and lastly the transport with 'G' and 'H' companies
Royal Dublin Fusiliers as rearguard. There was a moon for most of the
way, but it only served to make the surroundings more weird. Parallel
to our right ran a low range of hills, whilst on the left was the Mooi
River, with a farm looming up out of the night every mile or so along
the way. There was one halt of half an hour towards midnight, but the
remainder of the halts were merely of the usual five minutes'
duration. And hard it was to resume the weary way at the end of even
those brief spells of rest. Every one was so fit that the actual
marching was nothing like so trying as the difficulty of keeping awake
through the long, dreary hours, and one would time after time drop
asleep as one walked mechanically along, only to wake in the very act
of falling. Frederickstadt was reached in the small hours of the
morning, and the stream crossed to its left bank. There was then a
halt of about an hour to close up the transport, and very welcome it
was, for we were still an ordinary day's march from our destination.
Turning to our right, we brought the Gatsrands on our left, and the
word went forth that the Boers were in them, a report which seemed to
be confirmed a moment later as a blaze of light suddenly appeared
above their summits. 'There they are!' 'That's their signal lamp!'
were the comments that greeted the glory of the morning star, whether
Jupiter or Venus, on that as on many a previous and subsequent
occasion. On straggled the column, many of the men completely worn
out, having been reluctantly compelled to avail themselves of the
permission to ride on the waggons; the remainder, with grim
determination to march till they dropped, trudging patiently and
silently on. At last came the welcome flush of dawn; no 'envious
streaks' these, but the first message from the longed-for day which
ended that abominable night. When Pochefstroom finally came in sight
it was still a good five miles off, and those last five miles were as
bad as any part of the march. For though in some mysterious way the
coming of day had dispelled to a great extent the deadly sleepiness
from which most of us suffered, our aching limbs now began to make
themselves manifest, and those far-off trees never seemed to get any
nearer. However, by ten o'clock the last man was in, but very nearly
done. It had been a remarkable march--very remarkable seeing the
conditions under which some of the troops performed it.[12] For to do
from thirty-five to thirty-eight miles, most of it by night, on an
empty stomach, after a hard ten hours' work under a hot sun, in
sixteen hours, is a performance of which any troops may be justly
proud.

         [Footnote 12: That minor operations such as these should
         receive but scant recognition at the hands of historians is
         not to be wondered at, but neither the official nor the
         _Times_ histories in their accounts of this surprise of
         Pochefstroom found space to mention the length of this march,
         an omission which is very greatly to be wondered at.]

Nor was it altogether without result, for our mounted and
waggon-carried troops had arrived much earlier, and, fairly taking the
place by surprise, had surrounded it, killed seven, and captured some
seventy or eighty prisoners, and put a good many more to ignominious
and hasty flight.

We also obtained some draught beer. Beer! None of us had tasted it for
months. How it went down! Yet our memory of it is sad, for the
unfortunate manager of the brewery was afterwards shot by the Boers
for selling it to us. The column remained at Pochefstroom till the
12th, our stay being darkened by the melancholy death of the
signalling officer, Lieutenant Maddox, of the Somersetshire Light
Infantry, who was shot through the heart while going round his
stations.

[Illustration: A Group of Boer Prisoners taken at the Surprise of
Pochefstroom.]

On the 12th Colonel Hicks took command of a small force[13] which
moved out to occupy some kopjes overlooking two drifts over the Mooi
River. Starting at about 3 p.m., we did not reach our destination
(some five miles south of Frederickstadt) till dark. Somewhat to our
surprise, the hills were unoccupied, as Boers were known to be in the
vicinity, while there had been a certain amount of distant sniping
throughout the march. Putting piquets at the drifts, the infantry and
guns occupied one hill, and the mounted troops another hard by. We had
just turned in for the night when a sharp rifle-fire broke out all
along the front, to which our sentries were not slow to respond. We
immediately occupied the posts to which we had been assigned, but the
firing soon died away. No one was hit by the enemy, but an unfortunate
trooper in Marshall's Horse was shot by a comrade, and later on
succumbed to the wound.

         [Footnote 13: Royal Dublin Fusiliers, 100 cavalry, two
         guns.]

[Illustration: Colour-Sergeant Cossy issuing Beer.]

At daybreak on the 13th, we located a Boer laager some five miles out
on the plain. One of our officers had a deer-stalking telescope, with
which it was possible to follow the movements of the Boers as they
woke up, a most interesting spectacle. They were of course far out of
range of our fifteen-pounders, but just as we were regretting our
inability to get at them, General Hart's force from Pochefstroom could
be seen trekking slowly in their direction from our left front. We,
from our elevated position, could see what the Boers could not, and to
watch our comrades creeping slowly nearer, while the Boers were
loitering about and stretching themselves, was a sight the opportunity
to view which was seldom afforded in the course of the war. But long
before the General got close enough to do any harm, the alarm went.
Any one who has ever seen a pebble cast into an ants' nest can realise
the proceedings of the next two minutes. Darting about in every
direction, the Boers caught their horses and inspanned their transport
with a celerity which fairly took our breath away, and in what seemed
an incredibly short space of time they were trekking away across our
right front, their movements still more hastened by a few rounds from
the naval guns. Moreover, they came within very long range of our
fifteen-pounders, so we were enabled to return them a 'quid' for their
'quo' of the previous night, with probably about the same result to
their skins, though one riderless horse could be seen careering about.

A helio message from the General instructed us to march off and join
him at Frederickstadt, where we arrived that afternoon, spending the
morning in the usual domiciliary visits, getting a really handsome
waggon for the mess, and carefully searching a farmhouse belonging to
the Bezuidenhouts.

On the 14th there was a considerable amount of firing in the
neighbourhood, but nobody seemed to take much interest in it. As,
however, it resulted in the loss of twelve mules and some waggons, and
one gunner wounded, it is hoped that we did some damage in return.

On the 15th Colonel Hicks again took out a small force of all
arms,[14] for the purpose of getting in more stores, of burning
Bezuidenhout's farm (it being now clear he had murdered two
telegraphists), and to hold the kopjes we were on the 13th, while the
Somersetshire Light Infantry marched to join us from Pochefstroom. The
country was now thoroughly infested with Boers, who made some slight
effort to oppose Colonel Hicks. He very soon brushed them aside,
however, and, marching his force along two parallel ranges of low
hills, arrived at the place where we had bivouacked on the night of
the 12th-13th. Dinners were cooked on arrival before the companies
went out marauding. Whilst they were being prepared a cartridge went
off in one of the fires, and severely wounded one of the cooks, the
bullet penetrating his chest. This poor fellow was later on sent into
hospital at Krugersdorp, and, as the wound never improved, was
eventually invalided home. But the line was blown up just in front of
his train, and he was brought back to hospital. He soon began to
recover, and one day went wandering about without his hat, got
sunstroke, and died, one piece of bad luck on the top of another, and
a melancholy example of how 'when sorrows come, they come not single
spies, but in battalions.'

         [Footnote 14: Royal Dublin Fusiliers, two guns, twenty-five
         Yeomanry.]

A convoy under Captain H. W. Higginson, arrived at Frederickstadt at
this time, after having been considerably pestered by some Boers who
had shelled him with a nine-pounder Krupp, and severely wounded one of
our men. Luckily, the General had sent out a small force with two guns
to meet this convoy, or it might have had a very much worse time.

Next day Bezuidenhout's farm was duly burnt, and at 3 p.m. the force
started to march back to Frederickstadt, the Somersetshire Light
Infantry (wing) under Major Williams, with eighty prisoners, a large
number of refugees and waggons, starting an hour earlier, having of
course further to go. The march was not interfered with, and the force
reached its old quarters once more before dark.

The dreary monotony of these days and nights of trekking and foraging
suffered a variation on the 17th. In the morning 'A' company, under
Major Rutherford, took over the eighty odd prisoners from
Pochefstroom, and marched off with them to Wolverdiend. In the
afternoon a shell suddenly burst in the middle of the camp. The cheek
of these foes of ours. The first arrival was shortly followed by
several more in quick succession, some of which landed in camp, and
some of which went over our heads. We turned out, lowered the tents,
and then lay down in extended order, trying to locate the position of
the hostile gun. At last some one saw the flash, after which our naval
gun and fifteen-pounders picked up the range with admirable celerity,
immediately silencing the opposition. At a range of 3600 yards, the
second shot from the naval gun had burst within four feet of the
marks of the Krupp nine-pounder which had been shelling us.

At the time the enemy opened fire a regimental court-martial for the
trial of twenty-one prisoners had just assembled, under the presidency
of Captain Shewan. On the arrival of the shells, the court, escort,
witnesses and prisoners dissolved themselves with one accord, and were
not afterwards reassembled.

  'In such a time as this it is not meet
  That every nice offence should bear his comment.'

                              _Julius Cæsar._

The sun was in the enemy's eyes, and the village of Frederickstadt
almost immediately behind our camp, which may account in some measure
for the indifference of their fire, as we must have offered a
magnificent target to them. As it was, our only losses were four
horses, not a man being hit. But we were fairly caught napping.

The General ordered the regiment to take possession of the hill, which
was done without any further fighting, two companies being left on
outpost duty on its summit.

On the 18th some of the usual desultory sniping commenced on the other
side of the camp, but a demonstration by the inlying piquet ('G'
company, 2nd Royal Dublin Fusiliers) was sufficient to put a stop to
it.

Major Bird arrived back from Maritzburg. Next day the trek commenced
once more. A small force[15] was left behind under command of Major
Bird to hold the hills from which we had been shelled, and to take
care of most of the transport. The remainder of the column marched at
11 p.m. on Ventersdorp, where some Boers were reported. After marching
all night and covering some twelve miles, the enemy opened fire in
front and on both flanks. Our guns came into action, and a sort of
running fight was maintained. Eventually the enemy took up a more
definite position, when General Hart ordered Colonel Hicks, with two
companies of the regiment, two guns and a pompom, to advance to a
small ridge on one flank, while he with the remainder of the force
marched round the enemy's rear. This resulted in the evacuation of
their position, when Colonel Hicks's small party got an opportunity to
deliver an effective fire on them.

         [Footnote 15: Half-battalion Royal Dublin Fusiliers, one
         company Somerset Light Infantry, two guns 28th Battery Royal
         Field Artillery, and twenty Marshall's Horse.]

Next day sniping at the bivouac began at dawn, but the troops were
allowed a meal before resuming their march. Colonel Hicks was again
detailed to take a kopje from which a considerable but ineffectual
fire was coming. Moving steadily on, with his 200 men in
widely-extended order, he brought a maxim into action, which had the
effect of clearing the hill, but the long-range fighting went on
without a break till the evening.

Having more or less broken up the Boers in this direction, orders were
issued for the return march to Frederickstadt. An early start was
made, and at 10 a.m. a halt and outspan ordered. At mid-day the
officers commanding units were sent for, when the General informed
them that a large force of Boers, under Steyn and De Wet, with women
and children, 3000 strong, was reported in the neighbourhood of
Klerksdorp. Rumour further said that they were so bewildered by our
apparently aimless midnight movements that they neither knew where to
go nor what to do. The General added that it was his intention to
march again in the afternoon in their direction, to have another
outspan at dusk, and then to march all night and surprise them next
morning. The commanding officers looked at one another in blank
amazement, for they knew better than the General could the effect
these constant nights without sleep and days of fighting without food
were having on their men, but there was nothing for it, and the
General called upon his troops for one more supreme effort. At the
same time he heliographed to Major Bird to march from Frederickstadt
and join him _en route_, which was done.

Major Bird's force had not been left altogether unmolested during this
time. The company of Somersetshire Light Infantry were holding a small
knoll in prolongation of his left, and some 2000 yards off. Against
them the Boers brought up their Krupp gun which they had used against
us two or three days before. The range was considerable, but they
managed to reach their target; yet, though they fired twenty-three
shells into the camp of this company, the only damage they did was to
knock the top off a box of eggs _without breaking a single egg_. They
also managed to pitch a shell or two amongst the transport. Our
fifteen-pounders endeavoured to reply, but, in spite of digging deep
holes for the trails, were unable to reach the ridge from which the
Boers were firing.

Major Bird's force having joined hands with the main column shortly
after dark, the long march was resumed at 10 p.m. It was a pitch-dark
night, and the difficulty of keeping in touch, and the still greater
difficulty of keeping the transport in touch, wore out tempers as well
as sinews. On one occasion the regiment as nearly as possible got
left. We were following the first-line transport of the corps
immediately in front of us, and keeping close up to it, but the
Colonel got anxious, and, after several times asking the adjutant if
he was certain we were in touch, told him to ride on and see. He came
back in a few minutes to say that there was nothing to be seen ahead.
The carts in front had lost touch, and they were all we had to guide
us. The adjutant at once cantered on, and had the good fortune to
shortly pick up the tail of the column, when everything was soon all
right again. The march continued the whole night, dawn being heralded
by the corncrake-like note of the pompom, which led us to hope we had
effected our object. But once again it was not to be, for the Boer
laager had moved off, and from the top of a small hill could be seen
trekking away about 7000 yards distant. Men and horses had been at it
since 6 a.m. the day before, and any further pursuit was out of the
question. Indeed, an extra two or three miles that had to be done to
reach a better camping-ground almost proved the last straw. The right
half-battalion had marched thirty-three miles in the twenty-four
hours, and only slept on one night out of the last three, while the
left half-battalion had done twenty-six miles in eighteen hours.

Our enemy had slipped away once more at the critical moment, but our
spirits were raised all the same by the arrival of a dispatch, which
we understood called us back to Krugersdorp and hinted that the war
was over.

After a day's rest at this rather pleasant camp, the force moved into
Pochefstroom (eighteen miles), and marched past the General in the
Market Square on the 25th, remaining there until the 27th. It had been
on the move for nearly a month with very little rest, during which
time men and horses had undoubtedly got very wiry and fit. But beyond
collecting a certain amount of stores, cattle, and forage, it is
doubtful whether all the forced marches and strenuous exertions had
been of much benefit, or whether they served to bring hostilities much
nearer to a conclusion. Although the enemy, in more or less force, had
been viewed practically every day, it had always been impossible to
bring him to close quarters, and the policy of wearing out
infantrymen's hearts, tempers, constitutions, and boots in abortive
pursuits of mounted enemies was, and in the light of all that we now
know still is, open to question, for a reference to the _Times_
history of the war shows that all our wanderings and meanderings are
summed up in very few sentences, the most pregnant of which is to the
effect that word had gone out to the Boer Commandoes not to interfere
with us.

On the 27th the column started on its march back to Krugersdorp, and
did the distance (sixty-two miles) in four easy stages. It marched by
the road south of the Gatsrand Hills, with the Losberg on its right,
and with the exception of one day (29th) without molestation from the
enemy. On that occasion they made a somewhat determined attack on the
rearguard, attempting to cut off some waggons, and the last few miles
of the march took the shape of a running fight. The General had ridden
on ahead with the cavalry to our next camp, so Colonel Hicks sent back
a couple of guns to the rearguard, who shook off the terrier-like
attentions of the enemy without very much trouble; but they had
delayed the march a good deal, and it was not till late in the evening
that every one got in, and heard that the war really was over at last.
An officer in the regiment who was considerably exhausted sank on to
his valise, too tired to care for anything. His servant said to him,
'We'll be in Krugersdorp to-morrow, sorr, and I'll be able to get yiz
some claning matherials,' to which his weary master replied, 'I don't
care a damn whether I'm clean or whether I'm dirty.' In answer his man
made the following cryptic remark: ''Tis no use talking like that,
sorr. Lord Roberts says the war is over, and we'll begin soldiering
now.'

The following summary of the work done was published for
information:--


'SUMMARY OF WORK OF POCHEFSTROOM COLUMN.

'The Pochefstroom column started from Krugersdorp on the 29th August,
and returned on 30th September. The task of the column is to assist in
stamping out the resistance of the remaining scattered forces of the
enemy by hunting them, and depriving them of their supplies of food
and transport, with a view to bringing the war to an end. In the first
cruise of 33 days the column has marched 310 miles--the length of
England from Portsmouth to Scotland--and was in action with the enemy
on 29 days, putting them to flight on each occasion. The column's
casualties were only 3 killed, 24 wounded, and 3 missing. The Boers
lost considerably according to accounts of Kaffirs present; we found
some of their dead, including General Theron. In prisoners of war
and important arrests, the column took 96 of the enemy. Loyal
inhabitants, numbering 316 men, women, and children, were rescued from
Pochefstroom, and safely conveyed to Wolverdiend. General Liebenburg
ordered General Douthwaite to attack this convoy, but Douthwaite
thought it dangerous, and was arrested by Liebenburg for suggesting
that he, Liebenburg, "had better do it himself." The convoy was not
attacked. The column took from the enemy the following cattle: 2720
sheep and 3281 goats; 1066 sacks of mealies, 104 sacks of meal, 2
waggon-loads of mealie cobs, 12 sacks of wheat, 847 loaves of bread,
162 sacks of potatoes, 68 sacks of oats, 33 sacks of bran, 36,000
bundles of oat-hay, 299 bales of chaff, 400 bundles of manna-hay, 90
horses, 28 ponies, 11 mules, 36 waggons, 31 carts, and destroyed 45
waggons and carts that could not be taken away.

               '(Signed)               A. HART (Captain),
                                  '_C.S.O. Pochefstroom Column._

  '_Krugersdorp, 2nd October, 1900._'

[Illustration: 'Come to the Cook-House Door, Boys!']

  'We looked for peace, but no good came.'--_Jer._ viii. 15.




CHAPTER V.

FREDERICKSTADT--KLIP RIVER--THE LOSBERG.

  'Have I not heard great ordnance in the field,
  And Heaven's artillery thunder in the skies?'

                              _Taming of the Shrew._


Our camp, on this our third visit to Krugersdorp, was on the
south-west side of the town. The 6th Brigade (General Barton's) was
also in Krugersdorp, and had been for some time, so it was with
somewhat mixed feelings that we heard we were to set out on the trek
once more almost immediately. However, in the end the other brigade
went out, with what result will presently appear. Krugersdorp was now
surrounded by a large circle of forts and fortified houses. The
perimeter of these defences was very large, not far short of twelve
miles, but the positions themselves were well selected from a tactical
point of view. As they were continually being strengthened, improved,
and added to, in a few months' time it would have been very difficult
for the Boers to have taken the place, provided a sufficient garrison
remained in it. But this strength, or sometimes weakness, was a
constantly varying one--about the middle of December sinking as low as
300--which of course was risking a good deal. Moreover, it was not
until some time later, when the Officer Commanding Town Guards devised
an inner series of defences, that the town could be said to be in any
way safe from a midnight raid; and it was this, more than even the
capture of the place, which seemed so likely to occur, when the banks
and stores could have been cleared out in a few minutes, and the
raiding party gone before any force could have been assembled to
interfere with it. The town was, of course, full of spies and
friendly enemies, ever on the look-out for any chance of getting a bit
of their own back--and who could blame them?--but on the whole
remained very quiet and well-behaved throughout the occupation.

The regiment's headquarters were destined to remain here for the rest
of the campaign, with the exception of the three treks which form the
subject of this chapter, and Krugersdorp will ever be identified with
our name in South Africa in consequence. As we got to know its
inhabitants better, and as they got to appreciate our men better, a
kindlier feeling was generated on both sides, with which improved
state of affairs the cricket and football we played with them had not
a little to do.

General Barton moved off on October 5th, with much the same commission
that General Hart had carried, and immediately came into contact with
the enemy, the noise of the fight sounding loud in our ears, while
from Captain Nelson's piquet the bursting shells and even some of the
Boers could be plainly seen. The day before a flag of truce had come
in with a letter, saying that one of our men was lying wounded in a
farmhouse a little way outside the outposts; a waggon was sent out and
brought him in, when he proved to be one of our mounted infantry, who
had been wounded in Colonel Rochfort's dashing attack on a Boer laager
near Pretoria.[16] The Boers had looked after him as well as they
could, and dressed his wounds according to their homely lights, and
altogether played the game so far as he was concerned.

         [Footnote 16: The writer was recently dining with
         Colonel--now Major-General--Rochfort, when that officer
         particularly asked him to mention how splendidly the party of
         Dublin Fusiliers under his command had behaved on this
         occasion, and his admiration of their soldierly conduct at
         all times while serving under him.]

Next day still brought the sound of General Barton's artillery, and
the right half-battalion under Major Bird went out as escort to two
waggon-loads of ammunition for him. The General sent half-way to meet
him, and our men got back all right about 6 p.m.

With the advent of summer the thunderstorms increased in frequency and
severity, and it was no joke to have to suddenly jump up and hang on
to the pole of one's tent to prevent it being blown away, with the
uncomfortable knowledge that lightning has a partiality for running
down tent-poles. We had one really bad experience in this way, to be
narrated later, but nothing to touch the blizzard that struck the camp
of the 5th Battalion Royal Dublin Fusiliers near Mafeking, when sheets
of corrugated iron flew about like packs of gigantic cards, and
Colonel Gernon and Captain Baker, the Quartermaster, together with
many others, sustained very serious injuries. Still, our share was bad
enough, and quite spoiled the summer for a good many of us. The
mornings would break clear, cloudless, and invigorating; but about 3
p.m. on about three days of the week, a bunch of cotton-wool clouds
would appear from the south. As these rose higher and higher, they
swelled into enormous piles of grand, rolling cloud-masses, like
stupendous snow-clad mountains, whose bases grew black and ever
blacker, until they would suddenly be riven by blinding flashes of
flickering ribbons of lightning, and the air torn and rent by
reverberating booms of awe-inspiring thunder.

Second Lieutenant Tredennick joined at this time. Second Lieutenant R.
F. B. Knox should have arrived with him, but had to remain behind in
Johannesburg, as he was seedy. The train they were in had been
attacked by Boers near Heidelberg.

Rumour now began to be busy with General Barton's force, and on the
22nd an order came for General Hart to join him. We had just packed
up, when an order came countermanding the move.

Next day, however, another order came to the same effect, but
detailing Colonel Hicks to command the column. Though small in point
of numbers,[17] it would have been hard to have picked a better one in
point of quality. A finer body of horsemen, or one more adapted to the
work in hand, than Strathcona's Horse it would be impossible to
conceive. Without making any invidious comparisons, it is only just to
say that these Canadian troops appeared to us to have no superiors,
while the truly magnificent way in which they literally brushed away
the opposition, on the morning we joined hands with General Barton,
was a sight to be remembered.

         [Footnote 17: 600 Strathcona's Horse, 160 Brabant's Horse, 2
         Elswick guns, 1 pompom, Essex Regiment, 1/2-battalion Royal
         Dublin Fusiliers.]

The regiment was entrained, but did not get off till about 5 p.m., our
departure being marked by a peal of thunder which made even those who
declared themselves fond of such phenomena nearly jump through the
roof of the guard's van. We only got as far as Bank Station, as the
line was reported infested with the enemy, and it was important that
we should not be blown up. Indeed, we had scarcely arrived there, when
a loud explosion--fortunately behind us--proved the activity of our
watchful foes. After making teas we bivouacked in the train.

The regiment reached Wolverdiend next day, in the course of which the
remainder of the force assembled, preparations being made for an early
start next morning.

Fearing that information would get through, the Colonel gave orders
that the column would start at 6 a.m., but at the same time issued
confidential orders to officers commanding units that he really
intended to start at 3.30 a.m. Unfortunately, however, it rained so
hard all night that it was impossible to start until 5 a.m. Colonel
Hicks sent Strathcona's Horse out to the front and left flank, while
Brabant's Horse took the right flank and front. The Essex Regiment
supplied the advance-guard, while one company of the Dublin Fusiliers
acted as rearguard and escort to the waggons. In this order the force
approached a low line of bush-covered hills, which separated them from
General Barton. These hills were occupied by two or three hundred
Boers, who had been detailed to check our advance. On arrival within
rifle-range of the hills, Strathcona's Horse made a dash right at
them, the effect of which was so imposing that the enemy immediately
resigned all idea of resistance, and bolted as hard as they could go.
With this range of kopjes in our possession, the rest was plain
sailing, and we marched on to the hill on which the larger part of
General Barton's force was posted. The column had barely arrived when
a fierce rifle-fire broke out in front. It was impossible to see what
was going on, as the hillside was covered with thick mimosa bush, but
that a fierce fight was raging in our close proximity was very evident
from the prolonged and heavy fire, in which the pompoms soon began to
take part, while the naval gun and smaller field-pieces joined in.
Colonel Hicks, accompanied by an officer of the Dublin Fusiliers, then
climbed some little way up the hill in the direction of the 4·7, and
there a sight met their eyes which was seldom seen in this war. The
plain at their feet, stretching from the railway west to the village
of Frederickstadt, was covered with flying Boers--Boers flying on
their feet, a most unusual occurrence with them. As they fled across
the open veld in full view, they were pursued by every variety of
missile. In one spot, seven Boers were running side by side. The
officer with Colonel Hicks had just drawn his attention to them, when
a shell from the naval gun burst in the air behind them, and a second
later tore up the ground all round. Five fell at once; the other two
staggered on a few paces and then fell also, all seven being
afterwards found stone-dead. It was all over in a very short time, and
then the stretcher-bearers began to come in with their patient,
gruesome burdens, and the prisoners arrived under escort, to be
handed over to the Royal Dublin Fusiliers for safe custody.

[Illustration: Plan of Battle of Frederickstadt.]

Then we heard the story of the fight. General Barton's position, which
he had occupied for some days, extended along a line of low hills, the
two main features of which were divided by a valley running back at
right angles to the railway into the Gatsrand, the general line of the
position being parallel with the railway. The station was held and
used as a hospital, while the hill on which General Barton's camp was
situated extended down to the railway, and was the nearest point to
the river. For some days the Boers, under De Wet, had been gathering
round this position, and the force had been subjected to a constant
shell-fire and the intermittent attentions of a particularly
aggressive and unlocatable pompom. Under the railway, about midway
between General Barton's two main positions, ran a small, dry donga.
Into this underfeature De Wet had ordered about 200 men on the night
of the 24th-25th. The first indication of their presence was a
somewhat foolish attempt made by them to capture some mules. Unaware
of their numbers--and truly the situation was such that any one could
be pardoned for not grasping it at once--a company or part of a
company was sent forward to dislodge them and clear up matters. The
Boers allowed them to approach quite close, and then annihilated them.
It was now very evident that the donga was held in force, and, as the
General was aware by this time of the arrival of Colonel Hicks'
column, he launched a vigorous attack. This was the heavy firing we
heard on our arrival. After offering a slight resistance, some of the
enemy surrendered, the remainder flying on foot as already stated to
their horses, which they had left amongst the trees near the river. It
is not often the Boer leaves his horse thus, and it offered strong
presumptive evidence of their confidence in their ability to rush the
position, in accordance with De Wet's intention.

The battalion bivouacked on the hill, and threw out outposts. To them
was also assigned next morning the intensely unpleasant duty of
shooting three prisoners who had been tried and found guilty of
showing the white flag and afterwards resuming their fire. 'G'
company, being the nearest piquet to the place selected for the
execution, was detailed to carry it out. The casualties on our side
had been about forty-one killed and wounded, while twenty-four Boers
were killed, sixteen wounded, and twenty-six taken prisoner.

[Illustration: Sergeant French and the Officers' Mess, Nachtmaal.]

After remaining at Frederickstadt on the 26th, orders came for our
return to Krugersdorp on the 27th. We had an uneventful march to
Wolverdiend, and there entrained, reaching our destination late in the
evening. The officers, as usual, rode in the guard's van, and, as
these trains used to bump and jolt in the most unpleasant manner, we
made ourselves as comfortable as we could in a sort of 'zariba'
composed of our valises and a number of large packages sewn up in
sackcloth. Our feelings when we later on discovered that these
packages were corpses may be left to the imagination.

We returned to our last camp, and set to work to make it more
comfortable, running up wood and corrugated-iron shelters for stores,
officers' mess, &c. We were also kept perpetually busy in building
more forts and improving those already in existence. Captain Romer
gave his name to a work which he erected and on which he expended much
time, pains, and ingenuity. Posts and piquets also had to be held on
all the principal roads into the town. Captain Nelson, R.M.L.I., in
command of one of these, one afternoon shouted to two men who were
driving through his posts to stop. Unfortunately for them, they paid
no attention and drove on, so he seized a rifle and fired, killing one
of the occupants stone-dead, an exemplary lesson to the inhabitants to
make them understand that outposts were not posted for amusement.

General Clements' column was now stationed at Krugersdorp, and we saw
something of Captain MacBean, Royal Dublin Fusiliers, his
Brigade-Major. Alas! poor MacBean; he was killed a few days later,
standing close beside his General, at the battle of Nooitgedacht. A
universal favourite, and one of the most popular officers in the
regiment, he was also probably the ablest. Passing brilliantly into
and through the Staff College, he went on to the Egyptian Army, taking
part in all the principal actions up to and including the battle of
Omdurman, receiving a D.S.O. in recognition of his services. In the
present campaign he had commenced the war as a Brigade-Major, later on
serving on General Hunter's staff, and now transferred to General
Clements', who had the highest opinion of his capabilities. Amongst
many other accomplishments he was one of the best bridge-players in
the service. There is little doubt that if he had been spared he would
have risen to the highest rank. He was gazetted to a Brevet-Majority
after his death.

On November 15th Lord Roberts inspected the regiment, and
congratulated them on the work they had done, afterwards speaking to
Major English and telling him how highly he had thought of the
Zuikerbosch affair. It is these little acts of kindness and
remembrance that make all the difference, and their effect is much
more far-reaching than those who confer them often imagine. One only
does one's duty, of course, but yet one is only human, and it is very
pleasant to feel that that duty has been appreciated.

Captain Lowndes, the adjutant, who had been home after his severe
wound at Talana, now rejoined the regiment, and took over the
adjutancy from Captain Fetherstonhaugh. That officer had filled the
post with marked zeal and ability for over twelve months, and was the
only officer who was present with the Headquarters of the battalion
from the start of the war without being wounded.

On November 16th the regiment formed part of a column,[18] ordered to
march off and scour the veld, though our destination was, as usual,
shrouded in mystery. The night of the 15th-16th however, precluded any
possibility of carrying out the intended early start, as the rain
descended in torrents, deluging kits and country. At about 2 p.m.,
however, a start was effected, and all went well till a small drift
was reached, when the 'cow-gun,' which had taken the place of our old
and tried friend, the Naval gun, stuck hopelessly. Colonel Hicks fell
out 120 men and put them on to the drag-ropes. Their first pull was
too much for the rope, which broke, with the inevitable result that
the whole 120 were deposited on the veld, on the broad of their backs.
Another and a stouter rope was produced, which proved itself equal to
the strain, and with a long pull, a strong pull, and a pull all
together, the heavy weapon was dragged on to _terra firma_, and the
march resumed, a halt being made for the night about eight or nine
miles out, and almost on the historic site of Doornkop.

         [Footnote 18: South Wales Borderers, Royal Dublin Fusiliers,
         28th Battery, R.F.A., 4·7 inch gun, mounted details.]

The trek was resumed next morning under more favourable auspices, but
these soon proved a delusion and a snare. The column was making for a
pass in the Gatsrand, not far from the waterworks, known to be in the
enemy's occupation, when at about 11 o'clock a violent thunderstorm
broke directly overhead. Marching along, soaked to the skin, with a
lightning-conductor in the shape of a rifle over one's shoulder, was
not conducive to steady nerves, but so dense was the rain that it had,
at all events, one beneficial effect, for the Boers holding the pass
left their positions and took shelter in some farmhouses, with the
result that they were very nearly captured by our cavalry, who,
indeed, succeeded in taking possession of the pass without opposition,
the enemy, taken completely by surprise, having only just time to jump
on their horses and gallop off. Getting the 'cow-gun' over the pass,
however, was no easy matter, but it was eventually accomplished, and
after a march of about sixteen miles, the force halted for the night
in rather a pretty camp, on a farm known as Hartebeestfontein.

[Illustration: 4·7 Crossing a Drift, assisted by the Dublin
Fusiliers.]

The column marched to Klip River, about seventeen miles, next day,
arriving there about 5 p.m. The rearguard was sniped at the whole way
by our friends of the day before, but without effecting much damage.
A cavalry brigade under Brigadier-General Gordon was here on our
arrival, and an exchange of troops took place, we receiving some Greys
and Carabineers in exchange for half a battalion of South Wales
Borderers.

A halt was now made for a day, most of us taking the opportunity to
get a bathe in the river.

Leaving Klip River on the morning of the 20th, we marched back in the
direction whence we had come two days before, and were soon engaged
with the enemy's snipers, of whom we captured one; but they had the
best of the argument, as they killed two of our column. One of these
poor fellows had very bad luck: he had received a letter at Klip River
only the day before, telling him he had come into a sum of money,
sufficient to enable him to retire and spend the remainder of his days
in peace and quiet.

Nor was the day to prove uneventful for the rest of us. About 1 p.m.
it began to cloud over, and presently to rain; this soon turned into
hail, of the variety which one is accustomed to at home. This was at
first refreshing, and one would pick up the cool hailstones--they were
about as big as peas--and eat them, and the rattle they made on the
helmets was quite musical. When they grew to the size of gooseberries,
and began to sting, they provided less amusement, shoulders being
shrugged up and necks arched to obtain as much protection as possible.
The unfortunate dogs, of which a variety invariably turned up with
every column, howled with pain, and the cattle and horses grew very
restive. But soon the stones, driven by a gale of wind, increased to
the size of cherries and strawberries, with occasional jagged lumps of
ice an inch in diameter. As there seemed no particular reason why they
should not run through the whole gamut of the orchard, and rival
plums, peaches, and melons, and as there was no earthly chance of
obtaining a vestige of shelter of any kind, men began to wonder what
was going to happen next, with an occasional sharper-than-usual belt
between the shoulders or on the boot to quicken their fancy. It was
only with the greatest difficulty that the horses were controlled, but
the stones providentially grew no larger, though the storm continued.
The entire country-side was a rolling mass of ice nearly over the tops
of boots. Runnels and rivulets became roaring torrents, roads became
rivers. When the storm eventually subsided the transport of course
could not go another yard, and camp was pitched where we were. The
carpet of hailstones in the tents slowly melted into mud, and we made
ourselves as comfortable as possible under the circumstances. Several
kids and lambs we had with us were killed by the stones. Not one of us
had ever been out in such a storm before, but, as those who had not
been on 'the Natal side' confidently predicted, those who had been
declared that this was mere child's play to the hailstones they had
seen there.

What became of the Boers we never knew: up to the commencement of the
storm we had been merrily sniping away at each other at extreme
ranges, but during and after it they entirely disappeared, so entirely
that even next day we never got a sign of them, and concluded they had
all been drowned.

There was, however, nothing to complain of on this score the day
after, as sniping was carried on all the time. Though this form of
fighting resulted in few casualties, it was destructive to peace and
comfort and enjoyment of the scenery. It was interesting to notice
what officers recognised when we arrived at places we had visited on
previous treks, and instructive to note that it was almost always
those who were addicted to sport and field-pursuits who were the first
to pick up their bearings and the lie of the land. The force
eventually encamped at the foot of the hill on which 'G' company had
spent such a cold and miserable night when waiting for the transport
to pass, two months before.

On the 23rd, the march took us up again through Orange Grove and on
past Leeuwport Nek, moving along the south side of the main ridge of
the Gatsrand, with three companies making the best of their way along
their jagged peaks. Two of Roberts' Horse were hit on this march, one
being killed.

The column reached Buffelsdoorn Pass on the 24th, after a spirited
rearguard action, the brunt of which fell on the South Wales
Borderers, who had several men and one officer hit. We remained in
this pass for some days, sending out small expeditions among the
adjacent hills, and erecting fortifications to cover the defile. It
was in its way an important place, being within a few miles of
Wolverdiend Station, and providing an excellent door through the
rocky, serrated peaks of the Gatsrand into the broad plain which lay
between them and the Vaal. Our camp was situated just on the north
side of the pass, in a picturesque place, with easy access to the
railway, and from a tactical point of view an excellent position.

Next day a convoy with nearly ten thousand cattle, sheep, &c., was
dispatched to Wolverdiend, without seeing any signs of the enemy.

The night of the 25th-26th could scarcely have been worse; heavy rain,
howling wind, and vivid and frequent lightning with its sonorous
accompaniment, put sleep out of the question; indeed, at one period it
became necessary to get up and hold on to the tents to prevent them
being blown away. With the advent of dawn the forces of nature gave us
a rest, our friends the enemy immediately filling their place. They
opened fire from some kopjes to the east of the camp, and endeavoured
to round up some of our cattle. The South Wales Borderers undertook to
dislodge them, and speedily did so, the 'Cow-gun' joining in at long
range as soon as the Boers evacuated their positions. Having disposed
of man for the time being, Nature again rolled up in dense masses of
magnificent clouds to the attack. The storm which followed was also
one to be remembered; the lightning could be seen striking the ground
in the close vicinity of the camp, and though no one was hit, we heard
that two men of the regiment at Kaalfontein were not so fortunate, one
poor fellow being killed and the other severely wounded. 'C' company,
2nd Royal Dublin Fusiliers, was on piquet through both these night and
day storms, and had, as may be imagined, an unenviable experience.

On the 27th, General Hart rode down to Wolverdiend to see Sir John
French. While he was away, word arrived that a party of Roberts' Horse
who were out scouting had been held up. Colonel Wilson--the senior
officer in camp--detailed 100 Carabineers to go to their assistance,
but they found the opposition still too great, so two companies of the
regiment were sent out to reinforce them, while the guns opened fire
from the summits of the hills. In the middle of the operations a
thunderstorm joined in to swell the general din, under cover of which
the Boers crept in round three sides of the force. There was never any
question of their succeeding in cutting it off, but the boldness of
their tactics was characteristic of the phase the war had now begun to
assume. There was a good deal of rifle-fire on both sides, and the
28th Battery R.F.A., under its new commander, who had replaced our
esteemed friend, Major Stokes, D.S.O., promoted to R.H.A., fired
nearly one hundred rounds. What casualties the enemy suffered was not
ascertained, but on our side there was only one, a man in Roberts'
Horse being badly hit. Those of us who were not engaged sat among the
rocks on the tops of the hills, whence a fine panoramic view of the
skirmish was obtainable by the aid of telescopes and binoculars.

The 28th and 29th passed uneventfully, Captain Romer occupying the
time in again demonstrating his architectural capabilities in the
erection of a fort near the pass.

[Illustration: Boy Fitzpatrick waiting at Lunch.]

On the 30th a reconnaissance in force was made along the Gatsrand in a
westerly direction, the left half-battalion of the Royal Dublin
Fusiliers acting as the infantry of the force. Moving along the
summits of the hills in four lines of widely extended companies, they
marched to within sight of Frederickstadt before they returned.
Imagine exaggerated Pyramids of Cheops; imagine each block of stone
carved by stress of weather into a thousand needle-points and
ankle-twisting crevices; plant a dense growth of mimosa and other
thorny scrub in every cranny and interstice. Take a dozen such
pyramids, and do your morning constitutional over them, after the
scrappiest of breakfasts at 5 a.m., and you will find twelve or
fourteen miles quite as much as you care about. But the march was not
devoid of interest, though we met with no Boers. Small buck, hares,
and partridges were there in sufficient number to afford a good day's
sport under other circumstances, while a profusion of various kinds of
flowers afforded satisfaction to the eye, in strong contrast to the
bare and barkless trunks of trees riven by the frequent storms that
devastate these hills. In one place a most gruesome sight was met
with. Under a small tree beside a tiny stream stood a three-legged
cooking-pot, and round it lay three skeletons, with a scattering of
shrapnel bullets to silently tell the story of the tragedy. Beside one
body lay a Rifleman's haversack, an eloquent if speechless travesty on
the fortunes of war, for undoubtedly they were the remains of Boers,
over whose head a chance shrapnel must have burst months before.

A similar reconnaissance, but in the opposite direction, was made next
day, resulting in one man being wounded. Convoys were also passing to
and fro, and on the 2nd, Captain Fetherstonhaugh took over the duties
of provost-marshal, temporarily, from Captain Thompson, of the
Somersetshire Light Infantry, who had hurt his knee. Rumours of an
early move also began to circulate, with the Losberg, the grim and
solitary hill rising out of the plain to the south of the Gatsrand, as
our probable destination. For some time past the Boers had used it as
a sort of headquarters and rallying-place for their frequent raiding
parties. Columns were now converging on it from all points of the
compass, but as they could be plainly seen from its summit, the high
hopes entertained in some quarters of rounding up a large number of
the enemy were not shared by everybody.

Yet the start at 9 p.m. on the 3rd was sufficiently impressive. The
officers were assembled, and had their several duties clearly pointed
out to them, one peak of the hill being assigned to the South Wales
Borderers and the other to the Dublin Fusiliers. To 'A' company of the
latter regiment, under Major English, was given the honour of leading
the attack, which was to be made at dawn next morning. Silently and
with all due precautions the column slowly wound its way down the
pass, like some gigantic boa-constrictor, and out on to the plain
below. Whenever a farm was reached it was entered, and steps taken to
prevent lights being shown or signals flashed: three Boers, booted and
spurred, being taken in one. It was a perfect night for marching, all
Nature hushed in deep repose save the loud-mouthed bull-frog; the moon
set an hour before dawn, reminding one of Whyte-Melville's line:

  'The darkest hour of all the night is that which brings the day.'

But dark as it was our objective could be seen ominously looming up--a
lamp-black mass against the velvet softness of starlit sky. The
movement had been admirably timed, and as day broke the two regiments
advanced to the attack, the South Wales Borderers on the right, the
Dublins on the left, while the artillery opened fire against the
hillside between the two summits. But that was all. Not a shot was
fired in return. Not a Boer was even seen. Nothing. Except, indeed,
large quantities of most delicious and most acceptable oranges, after
eating which the tired troops lay in the rain, which commenced to pour
down, and slept peacefully till the transport came up.

Before we started next morning, a huge herd of blesbok suddenly
appeared on the scene, wildly galloping about in every direction,
being continually brought up by the barbed wire fences of the farms. A
good many were shot, but it was cruel to kill them, or try to, with
hard bullets, and many and many a beast must have got away badly
wounded, whilst the indiscriminate manner in which the sportsmen fired
in all directions was a source of danger, not only to themselves and
the buck, but to the camp as well. One fine old fellow, with a good
head, charged right through the camp, altogether eluding one regiment,
in spite of every variety of missile, from cooking-pots to helmets, to
finally fall a victim in another regiment's lines to a tent-pole.
After which interlude the force marched to Modderfontein.

Next day a helio from Bank directed the column to make its way to that
station, a party of the South Wales Borderers being left behind to
watch the pass at Modderfontein, where they were to have a rough
experience later on. The remainder of the force moved to Bank on the
7th, and marched again the same night for Krugersdorp, making a total
distance of thirty-three miles in the twenty-four hours, a good
wind-up to the three weeks' trek. An enormous number of cattle and
sheep were brought in, but it was the end of the Pochefstroom column,
which was now finally broken up into a number of small posts.

[Illustration: 'The Latest Shave.' Captain G. S. Higginson (mounted)
and Major Bird.]

The regiment camped once more on the same site it had last occupied.




CHAPTER VI.

BURIED TREASURE--THE EASTERN TRANSVAAL--THE KRUGERSDORP DEFENCES.

  'They are wet with the showers of the mountains, and embrace the
  rock for want of a shelter.'--_Job_, xxiv. 8.


By this time we had begun to regard Krugersdorp as our base, and to
look upon our returns to it as more or less getting home. But on this
occasion there was to be no rest of any length. From the plum-bloom
blue of the far Magaliesberg, General Clements' heliograph was
twinkling and blinking for the remainder of his force and more mounted
men. In addition to this Colonel Hicks took out a column. These and
other deductions left Krugersdorp with a garrison of 300 men to man a
perimeter of some ten or twelve miles, or, roughly speaking, just over
fifty yards for each rifle. 'C' company, under Captain Pomeroy, W.I.R.
(attached), and Lieutenant Molony, occupied Fort Craig; 'D' company,
under Captain Clarke, R.M.L.I. (attached), and Lieutenant Marsh, held
Fort Kilmarnock; and 'G' company, under its Captain and Lieutenant
Smith, took over Fort Harlech. Major Rutherford took over this fort
next day, as the captain of 'G' company had been appointed commander
of the town guards and piquets and interior defences. Colonel Hicks
had been ordered to Johannesburg to see General French, who informed
him that he was to take command of a mixed force[19] and march to the
Losberg, there to dig up a large sum of gold, reputed to amount to
nearly 100,000_l._; after which he was to proceed south to the Vaal,
and hold the drifts between Vereeniging and Rensburg.

         [Footnote 19: 400 Royal Dublin Fusiliers, 200 cavalry, two
         guns.]

Starting at midnight on the 10th-11th, the column marched till 6 a.m.,
covering fifteen or sixteen miles. The men then had breakfasts; and,
after resting till mid-day, when they had dinners, started again for
Orange Grove, the pass in the Gatsrand with which we were by this time
so familiar. It was occupied by Boers, estimated at about one hundred
in number, who offered considerable resistance, but who were finally
shelled out of it, without loss on our side, though charged by a
squadron of Carabineers with great dash. Having done about twenty-six
miles, the camp was pitched at 6 p.m., outposts being, of course,
thrown out on the adjacent hills.

Reveille sounded at 4.30 a.m., and by 5.30 the small column was on the
way again. Their destination was plain enough this time, and very grim
and formidable it looked in the broad light of day, considering the
very small force which was about to attack it. Moreover, on this
occasion it held something besides oranges. Advancing from the north
in the direction of the spot from which we had advanced to the attack
a few days before, Colonel Hicks made a demonstration as though about
to attack the eastern peak, then, suddenly opening a heavy shell fire
on the nek between the two, he launched his real attack against the
other summit. Although the hill was held by a considerable number of
the enemy, estimated at 500, these tactics proved eminently
successful, for when they discovered the direction of the main attack
shrapnel was bursting all over the nek along which they would have had
to gallop to meet it, and they gave up the idea and evacuated the
position, which fell into Colonel Hicks' hand with a loss of one man,
who had the misfortune to be hit in no less than five places. A guide
had been sent with the column who knew where the gold was, and a party
was told off to dig it up and bring it in. The guide may or may not
have known where the gold _was_, but he certainly did not know where
it was _then_, and the search proved entirely abortive. He was a
murderer under sentence of death, and was to save his life by showing
the gold and ten buried guns.

The force started at 5 a.m. next morning for Lindeque Drift. There was
a certain amount of sniping all the way, principally at the cavalry,
who were riding wide on either flank, collecting cattle and burning
straw and hay, in addition to guarding the flanks. Lindeque was
reached at 5.30 p.m., a camp of our people being in view on the far
bank of the river, with whom communication was opened by signal. The
drift was very deep, but an orderly managed to get across with a
letter. Orders also arrived from General French giving Colonel Hicks
thirty miles of river to watch, which seemed a good deal, considering
the paucity of the numbers at his disposal.

At 6.30 a.m. a helio message was received calling the column at once
back to Krugersdorp, and a start was made for the return journey at 8
a.m. The Boers endeavoured all day to cut off the rearguard, but met
with no success, the gunners shelling them whenever they got close
enough to be unpleasant.

[Illustration: KILMARNOCK. From a sketch by Col. H. Tempest Hicks, C.B.]

The 15th proved to be almost a repetition of the day before, the enemy
hanging persistently on the flanks and rear of the little column, but
showing no signs of any desire to make their closer acquaintance.
Indeed, that morning Colonel Hicks had prepared a small surprise for
them which fully realised his anticipations. Whenever columns were
moving about it was the invariable custom of the enemy to at once
occupy the vacated camping-ground in search of any odds-and-ends that
might have been left about, but more especially ammunition, which used
to drop out of our men's pouches in surprising quantities, in spite of
the most stringent orders on the subject. On this occasion the Colonel
left a small party in ambush when he moved off, with the result that
when half-a-dozen Boers began rummaging about in the camp they were
suddenly invited to hold their hands up, a request which they had
of necessity to comply with, one of them being a Field-Cornet and a
man of some local importance. A halt was made in sight of Randfontein,
on the slopes of which a column, under Colonel the Hon. Ulick Roche,
could be seen proceeding in the direction of Krugersdorp. Next day was
Dingaan's Day, and rumour stated that the Boers under De la Rey,
flushed with their victory over Clements, were going to attack
Krugersdorp.

The column marched the remaining fifteen miles by 2.30 p.m. next day
without seeing any sign of the enemy. During the six days they had
been away they had marched 102 miles, skirmished with the enemy nearly
every day, taken a strong position by a fine example of tactics,
captured a good many prisoners, and brought in a large quantity of
cattle, sheep, &c.: a very fine six days' work.

Since May 30th the headquarters of the battalion had marched well over
1200 miles. On three occasions it had exceeded thirty miles in
twenty-four hours--the record, of course, being the thirty-eight miles
in sixteen hours from Klerkskraal to Pochefstroom in September. But
the most wonderful part of its work was the strange immunity it
experienced from any of the determined attacks which were so
constantly being made on other columns. Whether it was good or bad
luck, good or bad scouting, whatever it was, the fact remained that
with the exception of the almost daily scrapping and sniping, which
constant use had made to appear as part of the day's work, no action
of any importance came our way in spite of the countless marches and
counter-marches we made to bring one on. With the solitary exception
of the afternoon at Frederickstadt, when the Boers dropped a few
shells into our camp, and the two following days, when General
Liebenburg paid a similar attention to the detachment left behind on
the hill, we had not been under shell-fire.

In the meantime, the disaster to General Clements at Nooitgedacht had
drawn all eyes to the state of Krugersdorp, which with its small
garrison seemed to offer a tempting bait to De la Rey, and column
after column arrived to assist in repelling the assault which was
threatened for Dingaan's Day. Before the reinforcements arrived the
General had taken every sort of precaution; amongst others, arresting
most of the principal inhabitants of the town, and holding them as
hostages. The festival, however, passed without incident, and the tide
of men and horses, guns and waggons, which had reached a record height
in the history of the town, soon began to ebb once more, and then
everything settled down to the quiet, peaceful state of affairs which
almost always characterised Krugersdorp. The band played in the market
square, and concerts were arranged in the town hall, while the General
set a fine example to his troops for their guidance in his treatment
of those of our late enemies who had observed their oaths of
neutrality, as a large number of them most religiously did. Ever
foremost in aggressive tactics in the field until the enemy was
overcome, the General adopted a policy of conciliation at other times
which undoubtedly had far-reaching effects as regarded the conduct of
the inhabitants of Krugersdorp.

On December 19th, 400 men of the regiment, under Major Bird, started
off to join the force under General French which was going to sweep
the Eastern Transvaal, very much on the same lines that the various
columns had been sweeping the Western Transvaal. Their special duty
was to act as a baggage-guard to the various mounted corps, a duty
which they shared with a battalion of Guards. Their lives for the next
two or three months were very much the same as they had been for the
previous two or three months, though they covered an even greater
number of miles, and, owing to the rains and thunderstorms of the
South African summer, experienced an even harder time. It is the
custom to speak in terms of high praise of the climate of South
Africa, but if the British Army had been consulted on the subject
after some of these treks, it is doubtful if their vocabulary would
have been large enough to enable them to thoroughly ventilate their
opinions. The fact is that the spring, summer, and autumn are ruined
by the desperate storms which are of such common occurrence at those
times of year. There are, it is true, four winter months of glorious
weather: fine, frosty, starlit nights, and clear days of brilliant
sunshine when the heat is never unpleasant. But of these four months,
two are completely ruined by the high winds which sweep the broad
veld, and which, in the vicinity of the mines, fill the air with
minute particles of gritty dust from the waste-heaps, penetrating eyes
and nostrils, throats and lungs.

The first portion of the trek was, however, spent in the country that
General Hart had been operating in. The following account of some of
their hardships and privations is given by Lieutenant and
Quartermaster Burke:--

_With General Knox's Brigade in the sweeping movement by General
French on the eastern side of the Transvaal. Detail of a few orders as
showing the hardships the troops suffered through bad weather and
scarcity of food._

Brigade Orders. 'Witcomb, 8.2.01. Owing to the late arrival of the
convoy, the force will go on 2/3 biscuits.'

This all the time we were marching daily and fighting.

16.2.01. Our force reached Piet Retief.

Brigade Orders. '20.2.01. The following will be the scale of rations
until further orders:--2 ozs. rice, 4 ozs. jam, 1/2 lb. mealie meal,
1-1/2 lb. meat. No coffee, tea, biscuits, vegetables, or salt.'

Orders received from General French:--'Convoy under General
Burn-Murdoch is terribly delayed by swollen rivers and bad roads. The
Pongola is fifty yards and the Intombi 300 yards wide. You must use
your utmost resources to economise food, and so meet this unfortunate
state of affairs, which will assuredly last till the weather
improves. No forage for horses and mules. Send parties for food to
search out as far as ten miles. Kaffirs to receive 1_l._ in gold for a
bag of mealies, or a heifer for five bags.'

21, 22, 23.2.01. 1 oz. jam, 1/2 lb. mealie meal, 1-1/2 lb. meat,
nothing else.

24, 25. Same.

26. No jam, 1/2 lb. mealie meal, 1-1/2 lb. meat, nothing else. I paid
a shopkeeper at Piet Retief 2_s._ 6_d._ for a quarter-handful of salt.

Brigade Orders. 27.2.01. By General French: 'O.C. units will take
steps to let the troops know how highly their spirits and bearing
under the privations they are suffering from bad weather and short
rations are appreciated by the Lieutenant-General Commanding.'

27.2.01. Burnt mealie cobs issued for coffee.

Telegram from Lord Kitchener to General French, Piet Retief,
28.2.01:--'Explain to the troops under your command my admiration of
the excellent work they have performed, and the difficulties they have
overcome.'

8.3.01. Full rations, first issue since 14.2.01.

To show that the troops, besides suffering from frightful bad weather
(constant rain for a month), had to work hard, the following results
are shown.

General Orders. The following results of our operations since 27.1.01,
is published for officers and men:--

_Boers_, killed, wounded, and captured, 393; surrendered, 353. Total
accounted for, 746.

_Cannon_ taken, excluding a maxim, 4.

_Rifles_, 606. _Ammunition_, 161,630.

_Horses and mules_, 6504. _Trek oxen_, 362.

_Other cattle_, 20,986. _Sheep_, 158,130.

_Waggons and carts_, 1604.

_Mealies and oat hay_, over 4,000,000 lbs.

                                   H. BURKE, LT.

Colonel Hicks now set every one to work improving the various posts
round Krugersdorp, setting a fine example to all by the interest he
took in the work, and showing his thoroughness by the attention he
devoted to even the most trivial details. He also took infinite pains
to make Christmas as pleasant as he could for every one. The regiment
was, of course, very much split up in the various forts and fortified
houses, but headquarters still remained till the end of the year in
our old camping-ground.

On the very last day of the year an escort of forty men returning to
Krugersdorp had a near shave of being cut off; they lost four men
captured, and would assuredly have lost more but for the prompt action
of Major English, who went out from Kilmarnock with twenty men to help
them in.

So ended 1900. It had been a hard year for every one, but one and all
had done their best, and no sign of failing spirits was visible
anywhere. It was difficult to see anything like an end to the
campaign, however, for the process of attrition, which now seemed the
sole solution, was necessarily a slow one, and considerably interfered
with by the various 'regrettable incidents' that occurred from time to
time in the huge theatre of the war. These not only assisted our
indomitable foes with extra supplies of clothing, arms, ammunition,
&c., but also had the effect of keeping up their _morale_.

On January 4th, 1901, the 400 men under Major Bird passed through on
their way to Elandsfontein, but nobody knew about the move in time to
go up to the station and see them.

Large bodies of the enemy were now known to be in the neighbourhood,
and a spy came in saying that it was an open secret among the Boers
that Krugersdorp was De la Rey's objective as soon as a favourable
opportunity should present itself. In spite of this it was difficult
to make the danger of going beyond the outposts appreciated, and this
resulted in the death of one of our men, Private Hyland, servant to
one of the clergymen. It was supposed that the poor fellow had gone
out in a cape-cart with the object of getting some flowers for the
church; his body was found on the 8th simply riddled with bullets, as
was also that of the Cape-boy who had driven him.

On the 10th, Major Pilson, Royal Dublin Fusiliers, one of the first
officers selected to proceed to South Africa on special service before
the war, arrived--not, unfortunately, to join the regiment, but the
South African Constabulary.

On the 11th the enemy blew up the railway just beyond Roodeport, the
first station out of Krugersdorp on the way to Pochefstroom.
Lieutenant Marsh and twenty men of the regiment were sent out as
escort to guard the Engineers who repaired it.

The storms continued to be very severe. Kilmarnock House was struck by
lightning, and the sentry on guard at the Court House in the town sent
spinning, fortunately only receiving a severe shaking.

On the 23rd the sad news of the death of Her Majesty Queen Victoria
was made known to the troops, by whom it was received in deep and
impressive silence.

A salute was fired by the Artillery on the 24th with plugged shell, to
celebrate the Accession of King Edward VII.

At the end of the month General Hart left us. The regiment had been
continuously under his command since the formation of the Irish
Brigade; officers and men alike had learned to entertain a deep
respect and admiration for their General, than whom no braver man ever
went into action. He on his part loved the regiment, and fully
appreciated the _esprit de corps_ which permeated it, from the Colonel
to the last-joined recruit. His farewell letter to Colonel Hicks,
another on the subject of our camping arrangements, and his farewell
order to his brigade, may all be found in the Appendix, and afford
proof of his regard for his troops and the spirit which he breathed
into them.

Colonel Groves took over command of Krugersdorp and its defences, and
gave Colonel Hicks a free hand: he also rode round the inner defences
with the commander of the town-guards and piquets, and arranged for
their being made stronger also.

In spite of the presence of a good many of our columns, the enemy was
very active all over the Magaliesberg and the Gatsrand at this time.
It will be remembered that on the return from the Klip River trek, a
party of the South Wales Borderers had been left to watch the
Modderfontein Pass.

This small force was now surrounded and being fiercely attacked, and
offering as determined a resistance. A force was hastily organized to
proceed to their relief, under command of Colonel the Hon. U. Roche,
of the South Wales Borderers. With half or more of the battalion away
under Major Bird, we could only supply 180 men, under command of
Captain Shewan, for this column.

They marched that night, and the following morning found all the hills
for ten miles held by the enemy, Colonel Roche wiring in that the
Boers were in too great force for his column to proceed. Indeed, the
column had to fight hard enough to maintain its position and to save
itself from being surrounded. General Conyngham, hastily gathering
together another 500 men and a battery, marched off to reinforce
Colonel Roche, but before they could get to the unfortunate post at
Modderfontein, it had fallen to superior numbers. The Boers, who were
under the command of General Smuts, sent in a flag of truce, giving
notice of the capture of the post, stating that there were many
British wounded, and suggesting that an ambulance and doctors should
be sent out to them. This incident was very hard lines on a most
gallant regiment, and in no way reflects adversely on them for one
instant. They defended their position splendidly as long as defence
was possible, and suffered greatly from want of water as well as from
the enemy's fire. Colonel Roche reported that Captain Shewan and his
men had done very well, and had held a hill on the left of his
position, until he recalled them.

Colonel Hicks never for a moment remitted his exertions in the
fortifying of the various posts and houses in the section of the
command for which he was responsible, with the result that he very
soon had them in a most efficient state. Ammunition, food, and water,
in sufficient quantities to withstand a regular siege, were stored in
each post, while the wire entanglements would have effectually
precluded any attempt on the part of the enemy to rush them. Indeed,
no precautions were omitted, and one began to enjoy one's sleep
considerably more than had been the case for some months past.

On the 7th, the headquarters of the regiment at last moved into
Kilmarnock, a house which had belonged to a Mr. Burger, a brother of
Mr. Schalk Burger, the acting President. Here they remained until the
regiment left for Aden in January 1902.

[Illustration: The Hairdresser's Shop.]




CHAPTER VII.

THE LAST TWELVE MONTHS.

  'In the morning thou shalt say, Would God it were even! and at
  even thou shalt say, Would God it were morning!'--_Deut._ xxviii.
  67.


[Illustration: Kilmarnock, Krugersdorp.]

With the occupation of Kilmarnock by the headquarters of the regiment
arrived the third and last phase of the war. It had begun with four
months' hard fighting, continued with twelve months' hard marching,
and was to end with twelve months of weary escorts to convoys,
occupation of blockhouses, and garrison work generally. It was,
perhaps, in its way, the most trying period of the three, for in
addition to unceasing vigilance there was added the dead monotony of
week after week in the same place, surrounded by the same faces, and
feeding on the same indifferent food. One was buoyed up by the reports
published from time to time of the hauls of prisoners made by the
various columns, but there was always some pessimist handy to discount
one's hopes, and even though the result proved their dismal croakings
more or less correct, they might have had the grace, even if they had
not the common sense, to keep their miserable opinions to themselves.
Thank goodness there were not many of these gentlemen in the regiment.
Throughout the war I only heard one man grumble sulkily, and only
heard of one man who paid too great a regard to the use of cover. The
high tone with which the war had been entered upon was maintained to
the very end, and if the regimental officer came out of it with
credit, the N.C.O. and private soldier did every bit as well.
Hardship, fatigue, stress of weather--everything was accepted as part
of the general day's work, and as such cheerfully met and thoroughly
done.

Lieutenants B. Maclear and J. P. B. Robinson joined about this time,
the former a brother of Percy Maclear, Adjutant of the 1st Battalion.

In spite of all the work, however, time was yet found for a certain
amount of play, the exercise of which was very beneficial. Cricket
matches were played against the town, the S.A.C., and amongst ourselves,
and later on football matches against the town and other regiments. We
proved more successful at the latter game than the former: not to be
wondered at, seeing that two of our officers--Lieutenants Maclear and
Newton--were later on to become International three-quarter backs, the
former playing for Ireland and the latter for England.

Lieutenant Knox joined on March 23rd, having been detained nine months
through illness on the way up.

In March, Major-General Mildmay Willson, a Guardsman, took over from
Colonel Groves the command, which now became 'the District West of
Johannesburg.'

On April 17th, Major English proceeded to Bank in command of a small
mixed force (one hundred Royal Dublin Fusiliers) to try and catch a
Boer force who had been for some time hovering round that station. He
returned on the 19th, having seen no Boers.

On the 21st, Captain Watson, formerly in the regiment, came to see us.
He was then Adjutant of the Scottish Horse, and was shortly afterwards
killed at Moedwil. He had distinguished himself on many occasions, and
had received special promotion into the Lancashire Fusiliers.

On the 30th, Major Bird and his half-battalion at last got back. They
had done a lot of marching and good work in the Eastern Transvaal with
General French's columns, but had not had much fighting. They all
seemed glad to be back; it is always satisfactory to have the regiment
together, as we have a feeling of dependence on one another that one
cannot have when working with other troops, however good they may be.

On May 3rd Captain Kinsman, Royal Dublin Fusiliers, came to see the
battalion. He was then in the S.A.C. He had been badly wounded some
time ago, having been with the force under General Plumer since the
beginning of the war, and present at the relief of Mafeking, and had
seen a deal of fighting.

On May 7th Lieutenant Seymour joined the regiment, in which his father
had also served.

On May 25th a force[20] went out to escort the S.A.C. to a fort they
were to build. The column was under command of Colonel Hicks, and
almost immediately met with opposition, the Scottish Horse, on the
left, coming in for a good deal of sniping. Sending out his mounted
men well ahead, and occupying a ridge in front with the Worcesters,
the Colonel then rode on with Colonel Edwardes, S.A.C., to select a
spot for the erection of the work. The only casualties were two men
wounded and five horses killed, and the force then bivouacked on the
positions they held. Next day building was commenced on a small fort
and three blockhouses, the building parties being sniped for some time
until a detachment of the regiment under Captain Fetherstonhaugh and
Lieutenant Maclear went out and drove the Boers away. By the 27th the
fort and posts were nearly completed, the enemy still hovering round
the neighbourhood, and next day the column returned to Krugersdorp,
meeting and dispersing a few Boers on the way back.

         [Footnote 20: 400 Royal Dublin Fusiliers, 100 Worcestershire
         Regiment, 200 S.A.C., 220 Scottish Horse, two guns.]

[Illustration: A Blockhouse.]

On June 3rd Colonel Hicks took over command of the Krugersdorp
sub-district, as Colonel Groves was down with measles, as was also
Lieutenant Bradford--an extraordinary disease for a man of the
Colonel's time of life.

On the 15th of June Colonel Groves handed over the Krugersdorp
sub-district to Brigadier-General Barker, R.E. Before leaving he said
some very nice things about the regiment, and we on our part were
sorry to lose him, as he had always had a good opinion of the
battalion, and had assisted the Colonel in his endeavours to put
Krugersdorp in a thorough state of defence.

On the 27th Lieutenant Frankland, 2nd Royal Dublin Fusiliers, came to
see us. It will be remembered that he was taken prisoner at the very
beginning of the war in the armoured-train disaster. Since the capture
of Pretoria he had been occupied on the line of communications. He
told us that Lieutenant Le Mesurier had probably never got over the
exposure to which he was subjected during his escape from Pretoria and
on his long march to Delagoa Bay, as he no sooner got over one attack
of fever than he was down with another. He also gave us an account of
the escape, which was a most gallant affair, and in the light of what
has since happened to the only other officers who escaped--Captain
Haldane and Mr. Winston Churchill--it seems hard luck that Le Mesurier
should have received nothing. He added that Lieutenant Grimshaw had
been attached to the Mounted Infantry since the relief, and that
Captain Lonsdale had got into the Staff College.

On July 1st two convoys went out, one under Major English and the
other under Captain Fetherstonhaugh, not returning until the 6th. The
remainder of the month brought forth nothing novel, however, and was
spent in strengthening posts and escorting convoys.

August also passed uneventfully, but on September 16th Colonel Hicks
was given command of a mixed force some 1000 strong, 170 of whom
belonged to the regiment, with orders to move along through the same
old Gatsrand country, visit posts, burn farms, collect cattle, &c.,
&c. He marched accordingly, but met with little opposition until well
inside the hilly country, where some sniping took place. After a
fortnight's trek he arrived in Pochefstroom, where he found General
Willson, who informed him that he was to succeed General Barker in
command of the Krugersdorp sub-district. He returned to that place on
the 30th, only to find a wire ordering him to go back for the present
to his column and to move to a place on the Vaal south of Pochefstroom
and turn out a Boer force which was occasioning considerable trouble.
Colonel Hicks by a rapid march anticipated the Boers at a pass leading
into this valley, their commander, George Hall, afterwards declaring
that this step saved us a hundred men, as he had determined to hold
the pass till the last.

On October 5th he encountered a force of Boers who were prepared to
dispute the ownership of some cattle with him, but he had little
difficulty in convincing them that under the circumstances might was
undoubtedly right. On the 6th the seven-pounder gun lost by the S.A.C.
was recovered, and George Hall, a prominent Boer leader, captured. The
Colonel induced him to send a letter out to his commando advising them
to give in, which resulted in twenty-two of them surrendering at
Pochefstroom a few days later. In addition to this the column captured
about fifteen prisoners and brought or sent in very large quantities
of stock, mealies, cattle, &c. The Colonel got back to Krugersdorp on
the 12th, having returned by train to take over his command.

Lieutenants Frankland and Weldon of ours were present at the fight at
Bakenlaagte, when Colonel Benson was killed, and had a hot time of it.
Our mounted infantry lost two killed and six wounded. The following
description is supplied by Lieutenant Weldon:--


THE ROYAL DUBLIN FUSILIERS MOUNTED INFANTRY AT BAKENLAAGTE.

On the afternoon preceding the move from Zwakfontein, where Colonel
Benson's column was camped, I was ordered to escort Lieutenant Biggs,
R.E., to a drift some miles away on the road to Bakenlaagte: this we
accomplished, bringing back one prisoner, whom we took near the drift.
At daybreak on the following morning our outposts were attacked before
the column had moved out of camp, and the rearguard action commenced.
Our mounted infantry formed the right and left flank guards to the
light transport, the right under Lieutenant Grimshaw, and the left
under Lieutenants Frankland and Weldon. The enemy did not pay much
attention to us at first, but after going a little way I galloped with
my section to take possession of a small kopje which commanded the
route. The Boers made a simultaneous dash for it, resulting in a
spirited race, in which we proved victors, having been expedited on
the way by two 'belts' from our own pompom. On gaining the hill we at
once poured a heavy fire into our opponents, who withdrew. In the
meantime considerable difficulty was experienced in getting the
transport over the drift, which gave the Boers time to get round us.
Eventually, however, most of it was got across and the march resumed.
On nearing camp our mounted infantry closed in a bit, when we were
suddenly fired on from a farmhouse flying the Red Cross flag, and
sustained five or six casualties. We were detailed to a section of the
defence of Bakenlaagte, which was practically surrounded. We lay down
on the slopes with our heads downhill, and kept the enemy well away,
taking the opportunity to improvise some sort of head-cover whenever
their fire slackened. Although we fully expected an attack in the
night, or at dawn, none was made, there being no sign of the enemy
next day.

                                   KENNETH WELDON.

On December 6th Captain Romer took over the appointment of C.S.O.,
Krugersdorp Sub-District, from our old friend, Captain Hart, who was
appointed to General Knox's staff. We were very sorry to lose him, as
from first to last he had done his best to oblige all, and during his
term of office made friends with everybody.

On the 9th Lieutenant Britton and fifty men of the regiment proceeded
to Middelvlei to relieve a party of the Border regiment.

On the 17th Lieutenant Robinson had to perform the
unpleasant duty of carrying out the sentence of death on a Boer
prisoner, who had been tried and condemned for shooting three of our
men after having surrendered.

General Cooper arrived on the 19th, to say good-bye to the regiment,
as he was on his way home. He brought the very welcome intelligence
that we were shortly to be relieved, but of course this was only made
known to the Colonel at the time.

Lieutenant Renny, who had been A.D.C. to General Cooper, rejoined on
the 27th, and brought further rumours to the effect that the regiment
was shortly to leave the country, and as orders had come to get in all
our employed men, and men from forts, blockhouses, and stations all
over the country, it began to look as if there was some truth in the
rumours.

On the very last day of 1901 a severe thunderstorm passed right over
headquarters, two of our men being struck by lightning.


1902.

On the first day of the New Year the order for the battalion to leave
South Africa arrived at the brigade office, its destination being
Gibraltar, the best of the Mediterranean stations; but next day a wire
arrived cancelling the move.

On the 5th, however, Lord Kitchener passed through Krugersdorp, when
the Colonel saw him and ascertained that the regiment was to go to
Aden.

At 8.30 p.m. on the 11th, part of the 1st Battalion Royal Dublin
Fusiliers, under Majors Shadforth and Gordon, Captains Swift and
Maclear, and Lieutenant Le Mesurier, with some other officers, arrived
to take over the defences from the 2nd Battalion.

On the 14th, 300 of the 1st Battalion, under Major Gordon, proceeded
down the Pochefstroom line to take over the posts at present held by
us.

[Illustration: KRUGERSDORP from Kilmarnock House. Shewing the Gold
mines Monument, Camps &c. From a sketch by Col. H. Tempest Hicks,
C.B.]

On the 20th, Captains Kinsman and Rowlands (now serving in the S.A.C.)
arrived to say good-bye, and on the 23rd, Colonel Mills and Major
Bromilow, 1st Battalion, arrived.

[Illustration: The 'Blue Caps' relieving the 'Old Toughs.']

On January 26th the regiment fell in for the last time at Kilmarnock,
and marched through Krugersdorp to the station. They had made many
friends during their stay, and the entire town, Boers as well as
Britons, turned out and enthusiastically cheered the corps as it
marched out of the town it had first marched into on June 19th, 1900.
The night was spent at the railway station, and a start made at 4 a.m.
on the 27th. A good view of Talana, from a distance of about five
miles, was obtained on the morning of the 28th, and it may easily be
imagined with what mixed feelings our thoughts flew back to that grey
morning of October 20th, 1899, and our well-loved comrades who had
given their lives to gain that gallant victory. Ladysmith was reached
about 1 p.m., and Maritzburg in the small hours of the 29th, which was
unfortunate, as the regiment had so many friends there. In spite of
the hour, however, a large number of the inhabitants were on the
platform with various small presents of cigarettes, &c., for the men.
Durban was reached a few hours later, when an illuminated address was
presented to the regiment, as well as refreshments to officers and
men, after which the battalion embarked on board the S.S. _Sicilian_
for conveyance to Aden.




PART III.




CHAPTER I.

THE ADEN HINTERLAND

  'For this relief much thanks.'

                              _Hamlet._


The voyage from Durban to Aden was a welcome change, but quite
uneventful, with the exception of one sad event, the death of Sergeant
Pearson, who had embarked in a state of collapse, with little or no
prospect of recovery. He was a most promising N.C.O., and his father
had served in the regiment before him. Aden was reached on February
11th, 1902, and the battalion disembarked that afternoon.

The year passed without any incident calling for remark, and on
October 1st the following notice appeared in battalion orders:--'It is
notified for general information that the battalion will leave Aden
for home in H.M.T. _Syria_, on or about the 11th of February, arriving
home on 24th February, 1903.' 'There is many a slip 'twixt the cup and
the lip,' however, and the old adage was once more to be exemplified.

For some time past rumours of approaching trouble with regard to the
delimitation of the Turkish frontier in the Hinterland had been rife.
A force of Turkish troops was encamped near Dthala, about one hundred
and ten miles from Aden, and the Sultan of Dthala finally appealed to
the British for support. The result was that instead of going home, a
column was organized under the command of Brevet-Lieutenant-Colonel F.
P. English, 2nd Royal Dublin Fusiliers, to watch the frontier.

The following is an extract from the Aden District Orders:--


DISTRICT ORDERS BY LIEUTENANT-COLONEL H. T. HICKS, C.B., 2ND ROYAL
DUBLIN FUSILIERS, COMMANDING ADEN DISTRICT.

  No. 450.      _Aden, Friday, December 12th, 1902._

In supersession of previous instructions, a column composed as under
will be held in readiness to proceed, on field-service scale, from
Aden into the interior of Arabia:--

In Command: Lieutenant-Colonel F. P. English, 2nd Royal Dublin
Fusiliers.

  Staff Officer: Major S. M. Edwards, D.S.O., 2nd Bombay Grenadiers.

  Supply and Transport Officer: Captain W. C. W. Harrison, Supply and
  Transport Corps.

  Staff Medical Officer: Captain I. A. O. MacCarthy, Royal Army Medical
  Corps.

  2nd Royal Dublin Fusiliers (including section of maxim gun and twelve
  signallers)                                   225 N.C.O.'s and men.

  No. 45 company, Royal Garrison Artillery
  (with two seven-pounder
  mountain guns and four nine-pounders)          80    "

                                                {25 horsemen.
  Aden Troop                                    {12 camelmen.

  2nd Bombay Grenadiers                         A double company.

  Section A. No. 16 British Field Hospital.
       "      "  68 Native    "     "

If the column is required to move out, they will be joined _en route_
(if necessary) by a detachment of No. 3 company Bombay Sappers and
Miners.

          (By Order)               C. H. U. PRICE, _Major_,
                                  _D.A.A.G. Aden District_.

The following officers of the regiment accompanied the
column:--Lieutenant Haskard, Lieutenant Wheeler, Lieutenant Smith,
Second Lieutenant Tredennick, Second Lieutenant W. F. Higginson.

The following standing orders are quoted in full, as they give a good
idea of the scope of the operations, the difficulties likely to be met
with, and the precautions taken to overcome those difficulties:--


COLUMN STANDING ORDERS BY LIEUTENANT-COLONEL F. P. ENGLISH, COMMANDING
ADEN COLUMN.

                                        _December 24th, 1902._

1. _Water._--It is anticipated that in all probability it will be
difficult to obtain good drinking water in sufficient quantities on
some of the marches into the interior. All ranks are therefore
cautioned to husband their drinking water as much as possible. Troops
and followers should be forbidden to draw water from the camel tanks
without permission from the officer in charge, and be cautioned
against drinking water from any but authorised sources, as some of the
water on the route is brackish and liable to bring on diarrhoea.

Each unit will detail an officer or selected N.C. officer to be in
charge of the water camels, who will see that their supply is only
drawn on by order of the officer commanding, and that great care is
taken to prevent wastage. Whenever possible, water tanks and bottles
should be replenished; halts will be made for this purpose.
Water-bottles will be filled overnight. On arrival in camp, the
sources of water supply will be pointed out by the staff officer, and
sentries posted to see that the right people draw from the right
source.

2. _Country and Inhabitants._--It should be remembered that the
country through which the column will march to Dthala is in the
British Protectorate, and that the inhabitants and their property must
not be interfered with. All supplies must be paid for, and foraging is
strictly forbidden.

3. _Camps._--On arrival at the camping-places, the staff officer will
point out the sites for the camps of the different units to N.C.O.'s
detailed for that purpose. Officers commanding units will see that
their respective camping-grounds are cleared up before departure.

4. _Transport._--On arrival in camp the transport in charge of each
unit will be picketed near its camp.

5. _Order of March and Baggage._--Each unit will be complete in
itself, being followed by first line transport, viz:--

1. Signalling equipment. 2. First reserve ammunition. 3. Entrenching
tools. 4. Water camels. 5. Stretchers. 6. Great-coat camels.

All followers not required with the above are to accompany the baggage
of their corps. The transport officer will act as baggage-master, and
all baggage-followers and baggage-guards will be under his orders. He
will see that the baggage moves off the ground in the following order,
viz:--Field hospital with its baggage in rear of fighting portion of
column; ammunition second reserve and ordnance park; staff baggage,
including supplies; regimental baggage with supplies in regimental
charge in order of march of unit; supply go-down; spare animals in
transport charge; rearguard.

          (By order)               S. M. EDWARDS, _Major_,
                                  _S.O. Aden Column_.

_January 2nd, 1903, Sheikh Othman._--On January 2nd, 1903, the column
assembled at its rendezvous, Sheikh Othman, some ten miles from Aden.

_January 3rd, Bir Sayed Ali Wells_ (2-1/2 _miles north of
Firush_.)--An early start was made, though as it was the first day's
march as a column it was not intended to go very far. The going,
moreover, was bad. It takes time to accustom oneself to marching
through deep sand, just as it takes time to acquire the 'heather-step'
in August. However, every one did well, the water was good and fairly
plentiful, though somewhat scattered, and the spirits of the little
force rose high at the possibilities of the prospect before them.

_January 4th, Bir Salim._--The water at this camp was good, but
insufficient in quantity, necessitating the watering of the animals
some mile away.

_January 5th, Shaika._--Another good march, the only incident of which
was the breaking down of the treasure-camel, an important item of the
force.

_January 6th._--Owing to the necessity of making very early starts,
long before daybreak, Lieut.-Colonel English gave orders for bonfires
to be built overnight. These proved a great success, and enabled the
packing-up in the morning to be accomplished with facility and
dispatch.

_January 7th, Alhaja._--This place was reached after a long and trying
march, but the water proved bad in quality and small in quantity.
Captain Harrison, however, luckily joined the force here with a good
supply from Aden, so all was well.

_January 8th, Hadaba._--Another tiring march, but a spring in the
river-bed provided a plentiful supply of good water. As there were
1300 human beings and animals to provide for, it can easily be
understood that the problem of the water-supply was a never-ceasing
care to the staff. Its solution would have been still more difficult
had not the O.C. column arranged that the Bombay Grenadiers and native
hospital should march a day behind the rest of the force.

_January 9th, Arrado._--A short march, and more water than was
expected.

_January 10th, Dthala._--There was a difficult pass to ascend before
the column reached its objective; three camels were in consequence
lost _en route_, one falling over a precipice and two dying from
exhaustion. By 1 p.m., however, all difficulties had been overcome,
and the camping-ground was reached without opposition.

_January 11th._--The remainder of the column arrived safely.

[Illustration: Dthala Camp.]

The rest of the month was occupied in putting the camp in a state of
defence, and the usual camp life. A force of 400 Turkish troops, with
four guns and twenty-five mounted men, was encamped only two miles off
at Jelala, and, as the condition of affairs, according to the
political officer, Colonel Wahab, was very acute, it was necessary to
observe the strictest precautions at all times. On January 30th the
detachment of the Royal Dublin Fusiliers was relieved by one from the
Hampshire Regiment, and marched off on their way back to Aden, under
command of Lieutenant Haskard. Colonel English did not return, having
received orders from Lord Kitchener to remain in command of the field
force, whose total strength now consisted of 818 officers and men, and
735 animals.

[Illustration: Dthala Village from Camp.]

_February 1st._--The situation now, however, became more serious.
Colonel English received a wire at 2.30 p.m. directing him to stop
Haskard's return march at Nobat-Dakim, and another at 6 p.m. informing
him that the whole of the Dublin Fusiliers were coming up, and also
half the 23rd Bombay Rifles. On February 10th instructions were
received to recall Haskard, who marched on the 12th, arriving at
Dthala on the 14th. On the 18th, headquarters and the remainder of the
Dublin Fusiliers left Aden, reaching Dthala on the 26th, when Colonel
Hicks took over command of the column, Lieut.-Colonel English assuming
command of the battalion.

On March 22nd the Turks, however, evacuated Jelala, retiring behind
Kataba. Jelala was at once occupied by two companies of the Bombay
Rifles. Captain Rooth, Brevet-Major Carington Smith, Captains
Garvice, Grimshaw, and Taylor arrived on the same day.

On April 27th a detachment, consisting of 100 Royal Dublin Fusiliers,
two guns 6th Mountain Battery, and 100 Bombay Rifles, with supply and
transport, the whole under the command of Lieutenant-Colonel English,
occupied Sanah, where they remained until July 11th, when they
returned to Dthala.

On May 18th a detachment of 100 men of the Royal Dublin Fusiliers,
under Brevet-Major Smith, joined a column under command of Colonel
Scallon, C.I.E., D.S.O., 23rd Bombay Rifles, which proceeded on a
punitive expedition to Hardaba. They met with some slight opposition,
in which No. 7274 Private Martin, Royal Dublin Fusiliers, was slightly
wounded. The column returned to Dthala on May 25th, after suffering
considerably from heat.

On August 31st a small flying column, under Major Delamain, left for
the Bunna River. Lieutenant Wheeler, Royal Dublin Fusiliers, acted as
Staff Officer to this force. On September 4th, Lieutenant Haskard,
Royal Dublin Fusiliers, with thirty-five men, went out to Delamain
with a convoy, returning on September 6th.

Considerable trouble had for some time been caused by the depredations
of the Arab tribes, who had been killing camelmen, and generally
making themselves obnoxious on the line of communications. Information
was now received that these Arabs were beginning to get very excited,
and that they contemplated an attack on a post under Captain Shewell,
at Awabil. A force was immediately got together, and placed under the
command of Colonel English. He marched on September 13th, only to
find, however, on arrival that Shewell had beaten off the attack by
himself, with a loss of one man killed and five wounded. Colonel
English then returned to Dthala, which place he reached on September
19th.

On October 5th the same officer took command of another column, to
punish the Dthanbari tribe and destroy their chief town, Naklain. The
column consisted of Royal Dublin Fusiliers, 4 companies; 6th Mountain
Battery, Royal Artillery, 1 section; Camel Battery, 2 guns; Aden
Troop, 17 sowars; Bombay Grenadiers, 1 double company; 23rd Bombay
Rifles, 23 men.

[Illustration: A Frontier Tower. Abdali Country.]

Colonel English arrived before Naklain at 8.25 a.m. on October 7th,
after pushing back the enemy, who disputed the passage of a difficult
gorge for some time. He then proceeded to destroy the place, and at
11.15 a.m. started on his return march. The enemy clung to his flanks,
and kept up a long-range fire until 2.30 p.m., when he repassed the
gorge mentioned above. His casualties consisted of one killed (No.
5710 Private Andrew Keegan), and six wounded, while there were in
addition six cases of sunstroke. The column did not return to Dthala,
but marched straight to Aden, where it arrived on October 14th.

The remainder of the battalion left Dthala on October 10th, reaching
Aden on the 16th, where, on October 24th, it embarked on the transport
_Soudan_ for home.

For his services in the Aden Hinterland, Lieutenant-Colonel English
was awarded the D.S.O. It was never better earned. But no medal was
issued to the regiment, in spite of the fact that for ten months they
had been living under active service conditions, which necessitated
unceasing vigilance by day and night. It is true they had not suffered
many casualties, or seen much fighting, but as this was undoubtedly
due to the excellent manner in which the operations were conducted,
and to the precautions taken, it seemed a little hard that the coveted
distinction of a medal should be withheld, although the little
campaign is ranked in war services as active service.

However, the experience and the knowledge of the country gained will
doubtless prove beneficial to all concerned, who still look back upon
Dthala with affection, and speak of it with regret. On the night after
Colonel English had dealt with the Dthanbari tribe, Major Carington
Smith, who was in command of a small detachment, after posting his
outposts was just thinking of retiring when he heard the sentries
challenge; this was immediately followed by a rush of horsemen, headed
by a most gorgeously dressed officer. Reining up almost at Smith's
feet he informed him that his master, a neighbouring potentate,
friendly to the English, had sent him and his men to assist in the
repulse of the bloodthirsty Dthanbari tribe, who might be expected to
attempt to rush the camp that night. Although not anticipating
anything of the kind, Major Smith was far too polite to say so, and
after thanking his allies, suggested that they should take up a line
of cossack posts in front of his outpost line. To this they
consented, but before leaving declared their earnest conviction that
an assault would be delivered. Shortly after midnight Smith was
awakened by a fiendish din. Grasping his sword with one hand and his
pistol with the other, he rushed out to meet the crisis. From every
direction his allies came galloping in as fast as their horses could
lay legs to the ground, while the detachment sprang to arms in a
second, fully expecting to be attacked by every Arab in the
Hinterland. Reining up his horse as before, the leader of the cavalry
once more saluted Smith, and made the following report: 'Sah, I have
honour to salute you, and inform your Honour that Dthanbari tribe have
not yet arrived.'

The following description of the action at Naklain appeared in the
home press:--


'AN ARAB DRIVE.'

'HOT FIGHTING IN THE ADEN HINTERLAND.

'The expedition, under Brevet-Lieutenant-Colonel English, was sent out
to destroy the chief village and crops of the tribe Naklain, as
punishment for the shooting of Government camels and the looting of
his Majesty's mails. The tribe is very warlike, and their country had
never hitherto been penetrated.

'After leaving As Suk camp, the British column began to wind among the
mountains, which rise very abruptly from the plain, and, as they met
with no opposition for a considerable time, they began to think there
would be no resistance. Suddenly, without warning of any sort, a
ragged volley was opened on the advance-guard, apparently from some
very broken ground, fifty to a hundred yards in front.

'This seemed to be a prearranged signal, for from the hills on both
flanks the firing was taken up, the enemy constantly changing their
positions after firing. The guns were brought into action almost at
once, and the infantry, extending at the double, soon covered a wide
front and swept along the hills parallel to the advance.


'MOVING FORWARD.

'After the surrounding hills had been shelled, the whole column moved
forward, the infantry pushing the enemy back step by step until the
village of Naklain was reached. While parties of men were told off to
keep down the enemy's fire from points of vantage, others proceeded to
blow up the houses with gun-cotton, and the more inaccessible houses
were shelled.

'The crops were then destroyed by the men with their bayonets and
swords. There was a fierce fire while this was proceeding, the enemy
evidently not having expected such a reprisal. The work having been
completed, the arduous retirement commenced, the enemy following the
force up step by step the whole way back, at one time coming to
comparatively close quarters and necessitating a most careful
management of the rearguard.

'As Suk was reached after a trying march of twenty miles, the troops
being under fire most of the time, with scarcely any water and exposed
to a burning sun. The British casualties were seven men of the Dublin
Fusiliers wounded (one since dead) and one native and one gunner
slightly wounded.'

[Illustration: 2nd Lieut. H. St. G. S. Scott; 2nd Lieut. B. Maclear;
2nd Lieut. E. St. G. Smith; 2nd Lieut. J. P. Tredennick.

Bt.-Major E. Fetherstonhaugh; Lieut. A. H. D. Britton; Lieut. and
Qr.-mr. Burke; Major S. G. Bird, D.S.O.; Lieut. Haskard; Lieut.
Wheeler; 2nd Lieut. R. F. B. Knox; 2nd Lieut. J. P. B. Robinson; 2nd
Lieut. A. W. Newton.

Lieut. C. Garvice, D.S.O.; Capt. G. N. Cory, D.S.O.; Capt. M. Lowndes;
Lieut.-Col. H. T. Hicks, C.B.; Lieut. L. F. Renny; Capt. H. W.
Higginson; 2nd Lieut. E. F. E. Seymour; Lieut. A. de B. W. W. Bradford
(absent).

Officers of the 2nd Battalion Royal Dublin Fusiliers who embarked for
Aden.]




CHAPTER II.

THE RETURN HOME AND RECEPTION.

  'I must to England.
  I pray you give me leave.'

                                           _Hamlet._


Early in October, 1903, the 2nd Battalion at length heard the good
news that the date of their departure from Aden had been definitely
fixed, and on the 23rd of the month it sailed in the s.s. _Soudan_,
arriving at Queenstown late in the evening of November 9th. The tour
of foreign service had lasted for twenty years all but two months, and
only one man in the whole battalion had seen it through from start to
finish without coming home, the present quartermaster, Lieutenant J.
Burke.

The 2nd Battalion Royal Dublin Fusiliers left England for Gibraltar on
January 9th, 1884, and in February, 1885, proceeded to Egypt, where it
was quartered first at Ramleh, and later on at Cairo. Early in 1886
the battalion went to India, headquarters being stationed successively
at Poona, Nasirabad, Karachi, Quetta, and Bombay.

In May, 1897, it was suddenly ordered to South Africa, and quartered
at Maritzburg, as already stated in the opening chapter.

The details were at Buttevant, County Cork, and thither the battalion
proceeded on their arrival in Ireland.

Just two days prior to the arrival home of the 2nd Battalion the
regiment had been honoured by having appointed as its Colonel-in-Chief
Field-Marshal H.R.H. A. W. S. A. Duke of Connaught and Strathearn,
K.G., K.P., K.T., G.C.B., G.C.M.G., G.C.I.E., G.C.V.O.

On November 13th, 1903, the battalion proceeded to Dublin to attend a
public reception and also to receive their medals at the hands of
H.R.H. the Duke of Connaught. The following is the account of the
proceedings as published in the _Irish Times_ of November 14th, 1903,
to whom the thanks of the regiment are due for their kindness in
permitting its reproduction:--


(_Extract from 'Irish Times,' Saturday, November 14th, 1903._)

HOME-COMING OF THE ROYAL DUBLIN FUSILIERS.

The officers, non-commissioned officers, and men of the 2nd Battalion
of the Royal Dublin Fusiliers may well feel proud of the reception
accorded them on their return to their native land and city after a
long and arduous service under the British flag in foreign lands.
There was quite a contest for places on the gallery in the great
Central Hall of the Royal Dublin Society's buildings at Ballsbridge to
see the heroes of a regiment which had gained undying laurels in
Burmah, India, and South Africa. Exceptional arrangements had been
made for the entertainment of the battalion at Ballsbridge, and the
reception committee, which had for its chairman the Earl of Meath,
must be congratulated on the manner in which they carried out the
entertainment and provided for the enjoyment of such a large number of
guests. The arrangement of the hall was admirable in every respect. At
the further end a slightly-raised daïs was placed and profusely
decorated with palms and evergreens, and immediately behind the chair
subsequently occupied by H.R.H. the Duke of Connaught was the
regimental emblem introducing the figures of an elephant and a tiger;
the former bringing to mind the doughty deeds of the Dublin Fusiliers
in Burmah and the latter their equally splendid record on the historic
field of Plassey. At the back was the regimental motto, _Spectamur
Agendo_, and the roof and gallery railings were handsomely draped with
red, green, and blue muslin, while the names of the various
engagements in which the men took part were prominently displayed. On
the right-hand side of the hall four long rows of tables were placed,
handsomely prepared for the dinner, while the centre of the building
facing the daïs was kept clear for the men to be drawn up in proper
formation to receive H.R.H. the Duke of Connaught. The spacious
galleries reserved for ticket-holders were crowded long before the
hour fixed for the ceremony, 12.30 o'clock. Shortly before 10 o'clock
a large number of reservists of the battalion, about 250, and some
reservists from other battalions of the regiment assembled at the
Marshalsea Barracks, and under the command of Captain Perreau, Royal
Dublin Fusiliers, Adjutant 5th Battalion, and Major Baker, D.S.O.,
marched viâ Thomas Street, Cork Hill, Dame Street, Nassau Street,
Merrion Square North, Lower Mount Street, and Northumberland Road to
Ballsbridge. The men were dressed in civilian clothes, but wore their
medals and other decorations, and many showed by their appearance that
they, too, had played no insignificant part in the recent campaign.
They were accompanied by the massed bands of the 3rd, 4th, and 5th
Battalions Royal Dublin Fusiliers. The 2nd Battalion of the regiment
arrived from Buttevant by train at the Ballsbridge siding at 11.30
a.m., and marched across the roadway into the Royal Dublin Society's
premises. A great crowd of people watched the men detraining, and
several hearty rounds of cheering greeted their appearance. The men
looked in splendid form as they defiled into the main hall and took up
the positions allotted to them. It was at first stated that the
strength comprised 25 officers, 2 warrant officers, 8 staff sergeants,
54 sergeants, and 528 rank and file; but the figures given yesterday
were 18 officers and 523 rank and file. Be the numbers as they may,
the appearance of the men thoroughly maintained the regimental
nickname of 'The Old Toughs.' Hardy, wiry warriors they
looked--thoroughly capable of accomplishing the daring and courageous
deeds which have covered the Dublin Fusiliers with special glory. It
is worthy of note that the majority of the non-commissioned officers
served through the South African campaign from the Battle of Dundee,
and that Lieutenant and Quartermaster Burke is the only remaining one
who left England with the battalion nineteen years ago. The officers
and men of the battalion were dressed in general service (khaki)
uniform, and carried their rifles and bayonets. They also wore Indian
helmets with puggarees, while the mounted company were attired in the
clothing suited to this, particular branch of the Service. They were
under the command of Colonel Tempest Hicks, C.B., Colonel English, and
Major Fetherstonhaugh, and when they marched into the hall and took up
position on either side, in line of half-battalions, they were greeted
with loud cheering, and when the order 'stand at ease' was made a
number of reservists and other friends rushed forward to exchange
greetings with former acquaintances. There was nearly a half-hour's
wait for the arrival of the Duke of Connaught, and in the interval the
bands of the Fusiliers and Warwickshire Regiment played some
selections. At a quarter-past twelve precisely, H.R.H. the Commander
of the Forces in Ireland arrived in an open carriage, accompanied by
H.R.H. the Duchess of Connaught and Princesses Margaret and Patricia
of Connaught, and attended by the following staff: Major-General Sir
William Knox, Major-General Sir John Maxwell, Colonel Hammersley,
Colonel Davidson, Colonel Dickinson, Colonel Congreve, V.C., and Major
Murray, A.D.C.

[Illustration: Homeward bound at last after twenty Years' Foreign
Service.]

The Duke, who wore the uniform of a Field-Marshal, was received by the
following members of the reception committee: Major Domville, D.L.
(vice-chairman), Mr. Justice Ross, Sir Wm. Thompson, Sir Charles
Cameron, C.B., Major Davidson Houston, Colonel Finlay, Colonel
Davidson, Major-General Sir Gerald Morton, K.C.B., Colonel Paterson,
Colonel G. T. Plunkett, C.B., Captain Lewis Riall, D.L., Colonel
Vernon, D.L., and Alderman Harris.

Major-General Vetch, commanding the Dublin District, was accompanied
by Major Lowndes, A.D.C., Major Gilles (Brigade-Major), and Captain
Fox Strangways (Garrison Adjutant). A guard of honour of the Royal
Irish Rifles was drawn up outside the Show Buildings, and the band of
the regiment played the National Anthem when the Duke and Duchess of
Connaught drove up.

Their Royal Highnesses having taken seats on the daïs, the Duke of
Connaught, who spoke in a tone which was easily heard in all parts of
the building, said, 'Colonel Hicks, officers and non-commissioned
officers, and men of the 2nd Battalion Royal Dublin Fusiliers, allow me
to welcome you most warmly home again to old Ireland after your very
arduous four years' service. I am sure I am only the mouthpiece, not
only of the General Officer Commanding this Army Corps, but also of
every loyal Irishman, when I assure you how warm and how hearty is the
greeting that is given you on your return to your native country, and
especially in this capital of Ireland. You are an old and distinguished
regiment; raised originally for service in India as the Royal Madras and
Royal Bombay Fusiliers. During the time that you bore this name and the
numbers 102 and 103, you took a very honourable part in all those great
battles that assured us the conquest of India. Now, since the year 1881,
you have become closely associated not only with Ireland, but with its
capital. Your first service since you became the Royal Dublin Fusiliers
was in South Africa, and through the arduous services in that country
you, men, whom I have now the honour of addressing, nobly maintained the
traditions of those fine soldiers who went before you. When you were
sent from India amongst the first reinforcements of the troops in South
Africa in 1897--soon afterwards the war broke out--you took a leading
part in the Battle of Talana. You then went back to Ladysmith, and after
falling back across the Tugela, you were attached to the army of Sir
Redvers Buller, in the Irish Brigade under General Hart. During all
those weary months on the Tugela, you took a leading part in every
action that took place, and you distinguished yourselves so much at
Pieter's Hill that when the relief force of Ladysmith marched in, the
general officer commanding gave you the post of honour, and you led the
troops that marched into Ladysmith. (Cheers.) Men of the Royal Dublin
Fusiliers, this occasion is one of especial pleasure and satisfaction to
myself, as His Majesty has done me the great honour of appointing me
your Colonel-in-Chief--(cheers)--and I hope that in this you will
recognise not only His Majesty's high appreciation of the distinguished
services you have rendered to his throne and his empire, but also that
you will see in it his wish that you will have some special mark of
distinction when he has made me, his only brother, Colonel-in-Chief of
the regiment. I hope I shall long have the honour to be your
Colonel-in-Chief, and to have a connection with a regiment of which
every Irishman feels so proud.' (Cheers.)

Colonel G. T. Plunkett, C.B., read the following letter, received from
the Earl of Meath, H.M.L. for the County and City of Dublin:--


                                   '_Ottershaw, Chertsey._

'MY DEAR PLUNKETT,--Owing to absence from Ireland, I shall be unable
to be present in person with you on the 13th, when you and the
Reception Committee entertain the 2nd Battalion Royal Dublin Fusiliers
on their return home from foreign service, but I shall be with you in
spirit, and I hope you will let the officers and men know how sorry I
am that I cannot personally welcome them on their return to Ireland,
and to Dublin, after so many years spent abroad in the service of
their Sovereign.

'The fame which the regiment has acquired by daring deeds of valour
performed during the late war has travelled far beyond the shores of
Ireland. Military men the world over, and all who have studied the
South African War, have heard of the famous deeds of the Dublin
Fusiliers. The citizens of the Metropolitan county and City are proud
of the men who, mindful of their origin, have known how to make the
name of Dublin to be honoured in all lands. Both officers and men have
done their duty to King and country, and we, their Irish brothers,
accord them a hearty welcome on their return to the dear land of their
birth.

'Believe me, yours sincerely,

                                        'MEATH,

               '_H.M.L. for County and City of Dublin_.'

The Duke of Connaught then said: 'I have been particularly requested
by His Excellency the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland to assure you of his
warm welcome. He is away in England at present, but he has sent his
military secretary and senior A.D.C. to represent him, and to give you
his warmest wishes.' (Applause.)

His Royal Highness then distributed the medals and other distinctions
to the officers and rank-and-file of the battalion who were entitled
to them. The following officers were decorated, the Duke cordially
shaking hands with each recipient:--Colonel Hicks, C.B., Colonel
English, Major Fetherstonhaugh, Major Carington Smith, Captain H. W.
Higginson, Captain Cory, D.S.O., Captain Garvice, D.S.O., Lieutenants
Grimshaw, D.S.O., Haskard, Britton, Wheeler, St. George Smith, Knox,
Tredennick, Seymour, Robinson, and Maclear, and Lieutenant and
Quartermaster J. Burke and Sergeant-Major Sheridan. His Royal Highness
pinned distinguished-conduct medals on the breasts of Lieutenant and
Quartermaster J. Burke, Corporal Connell, and Privates C. N. Wallace,
M. Farrelly, and M. Kavanagh, each recipient being loudly cheered.

The following officers who had served with the battalion during the
war, but who had previously come home through wounds or sickness,
availed themselves of the opportunity to have their medals presented
to them by the Duke:--Captain Downing, Captain Dibley, Lieutenants
Renny, Supple, Newton, Weldon, Molony, Armstrong, and Cooper. The
distribution of the medals occupied over half an hour.

When this important portion of the programme had been completed, the
order to 'stack arms' was given, and the men filed into their seats at
the four long rows of tables which had been admirably prepared for the
dinner by the caterers, Messrs. Mills & Co., of Merrion Row. Messrs.
Mills & Co. had a picked staff of forty-two persons to carve the
various dishes and wait at table. Dinner consisted of several courses,
with selected fruit; while in addition to liberal supplies of ale,
stout, and mineral waters, 300 bottles of champagne were placed
before the honoured guests. This last-mentioned luxury was the
generous gift of Messrs. Perrier-Jouet & Co., of Epernay, the famous
wine shippers, who kindly and thoughtfully presented this supply of
their extra-quality wine through their Irish representatives, Messrs.
James McCullagh, Son & Co., 34 Lower Abbey Street. When the guests
were seated, H.R.H. the Duke of Connaught, the Duchess of Connaught,
and the Princesses Margaret and Patricia of Connaught, with the
Reception Committee, a number of ladies, and a resplendent military
_entourage_, walked slowly down between the rows of tables, stopping
to speak a few gracious words to the non-commissioned officers and men
who had made themselves conspicuous even amongst their comrades for
valorous deeds and unflinching devotion to duty. Many of the
reservists who sat beside former 'chums' at table, and on whose less
warlike garb, the ordinary civilian clothes, medals and clasps shone
out in high relief, also received kindly congratulations from the
Commander-in-Chief in Ireland. Meanwhile the string band of the 21st
Lancers, who occupied a good position on the gallery, played a
beautiful selection of airs, principally Irish, not the least being
'The Wearin' of the Green.' The Royal party on walking down the centre
of the hall was enthusiastically cheered, and the Duchess and her
daughters left the building at about half-past one.

The Duke remained for lunch with his staff and the officers of the
battalion. The health of His Majesty the King was drunk amidst much
enthusiasm. After dinner, cigars and cigarettes and tobacco were
liberally distributed, officers of the regiment performing most of
this agreeable duty, and each man was presented with a nice briar pipe
before leaving, the gift of Messrs. Lalor & Co., of Nassau Street.

In the interval between dinner and leaving the premises at
Ballsbridge, many friends and relatives of the members of the
battalion were afforded an opportunity for a pleasant chat, and most
of these accompanied the men in their subsequent march through the
city. One figure attracted much attention during the afternoon--a
sturdy soldier who formerly belonged to the Royal Dublins, and who
appeared in the quaint, and, in this country, unusual uniform of a
West African regiment. It would be certainly less than unwarranted to
refer to the general appearance and behaviour of the men. Clean,
smart, soldierly fellows, they all appeared to be impressed with the
one idea--that they belonged to a crack corps with unrivalled
traditions to maintain.

The departure from Ballsbridge occasioned unbounded enthusiasm on the
part of thousands of eager spectators, who, unaware of the exact time
at which the entertainment would finish, had patiently waited for a
couple of hours to catch a glimpse of the 'Old Toughs.' The main
thoroughfare from the Show-grounds to Pembroke Road was lined by
detachments of the Warwickshire, East Lancashire (with band), and
Middlesex Regiments, while a guard of honour of the Royal Irish Rifles
(with their band) was stationed opposite the main entrance. About 3.15
o'clock H.R.H. the Duke of Connaught, preceded by two mounted
policemen and an escort of the 21st Lancers, drove out, and passed
over the route to be traversed immediately afterwards by the
Fusiliers. The Field-Marshal was loudly cheered as he proceeded to the
Royal Hospital, and repeatedly returned the cordial salutations of the
large crowds who were assembled at different points. The appearance of
the fêted warriors was the signal for an astonishing ovation at
Ballsbridge.

The scene was a striking one. A splendid body of the 21st Lancers,
numbering fifty, occupied first place in the procession, and these
were followed by four or five bands and the heroes of the day.
Another detachment of fifty Lancers brought up the rear, and a number
of men of the same dashing cavalry regiment marched on either side of
the advancing column. Many relatives and friends of the Fusiliers had
now an opportunity to exchange greetings, and strict army discipline
was at an end. There was nothing reprehensible, however, and the
progress to Kingsbridge was of the most orderly and praiseworthy
description.

The route followed was the main road from Ballsbridge--Pembroke Road,
Upper Baggot Street, Lower Baggot Street, Merrion Row, Stephen's
Green, North Grafton Street, College Green, Dame Street, Parliament
Street, and the south lines of quays to Kingsbridge. At different
points, like Baggot Street Bridge, Stephen's Green, and Grafton
Street, the reception was of a most cordial nature, while an immense
crowd in College Green raised deafening cheers as the sturdy warriors
marched past. Enthusiasm reached its height when the tattered colours
of the battalion, borne by two stalwart young ensigns, came into view.
The officers and men appeared delighted with the cordial reception
extended to them on all sides. At Grattan Bridge the band of the
Seaforth Highlanders, which had already delighted a large concourse of
people with some choice selections, struck up a lively air as Dublin's
guests moved past, while a splendid send-off characterised the
entrainment of the battalion at Kingsbridge for Buttevant, co. Cork.

The Railway Company made excellent arrangements for the men, who,
considering their long day and its happy experiences, went through the
ordeal in first-class style. After all, one could scarcely expect less
from soldiers who carry six or seven, or even nine clasps, on their
medal ribbons.

It is right to mention that a number of members of the Army Veterans
Association, decorated with their medals and other distinctions,
visited Ballsbridge, and cordially congratulated the Fusiliers on
their return from foreign service.

On reaching Buttevant, the men will be supplied with new clothing and
granted a general furlough.

       *       *       *       *       *

Shortly after the reception the battalion was once again supplied with
their home service full-dress head-gear--the busby, and it was with
much gratification that the men wore their new busby hackle for the
first time. This distinction was granted in 1902, when by Army Order
57 it was directed that the Royal Dublin Fusiliers should wear a blue
and green hackle in their busbies: that for the officers to be blue
and green, eight inches long, and that for the non-commissioned
officers and men a similar but shorter one, in recognition of their
services during the war in South Africa. In explanation of the colours
of the hackle it may be stated that blue is the distinguishing colour
of the 1st Battalion ('Blue Caps'), and green that of the 2nd
Battalion ('Old Toughs').

On November 27th, 1903, the regiment was honoured by having appointed
as its Colonel Major-General W. F. Vetch, C.V.O., commanding Dublin
Garrison, _vice_ Lieut.-General Sir John Blick Spurgin, K.C.B.,
G.C.S.I., deceased.

General Vetch joined the 102nd Foot on March 8th, 1864, was promoted
Lieutenant, July 1st, 1869; Captain, May 22nd, 1875; Major, June 18th,
1881; Lieut.-Colonel, June 7th, 1884; Colonel, June 7th, 1888; and
Major-General, April 1st, 1900.

After a quiet and uneventful stay at Buttevant for nearly three years
the battalion proceeded to Fermoy on September 14th, 1906, and took up
quarters in the New Barracks at that station.




CHAPTER III.

THE MEMORIAL ARCH.

  'Even so great men great losses should endure.'

                              _Julius Cæsar._


On August 19th, 1907, the memorial arch to the officers and men who
fell in South Africa was opened by H.R.H. the Duke of Connaught,
Colonel-in-Chief the Royal Dublin Fusiliers. The 2nd Battalion was
marching from Kilworth Camp to Ballyvonaire Camp on that day, but the
authorities very kindly did everything in their power to make the
ceremony a success, and Colonel English, Major Bromilow, and every one
of any importance who had taken part in the war proceeded to Dublin by
special train on the morning of the 19th, while the Depôt and Militia
officers also assembled in good force.

The officers and men of the regiment were very sensible of the honour
shown to them by H.R.H. the Duke of Connaught in personally opening
the arch, and so identifying himself with it and them, while every
Dublin Fusilier present felt an added pride in himself and his uniform
as he saw it worn by His Royal Highness the brother of His Majesty the
King.

The following account of the ceremony is taken from the Dublin _Daily
Express_, to whose proprietors our thanks are due for permission to
reproduce it:--


  'ROYAL DUBLIN FUSILIERS' MEMORIAL IN STEPHEN'S GREEN
          INAUGURATED BY THE DUKE OF CONNAUGHT.
             LUNCHEON AT SHELBOURNE HOTEL.

'To-day the Royal Dublin Fusiliers' Memorial to the officers and men
of the regiment who fell in South Africa was formally inaugurated by
the Duke of Connaught, Inspector-General of the British Army. His
Royal Highness arrived at Amiens Street terminus by the early morning
train from Belfast, and was received by the Viceroy's Military
Secretary. The Duke of Connaught at once drove to the Shelbourne
Hotel, where he was received by the following members of the Memorial
Committee:--The Earl of Meath, President; the Earl of Drogheda, Mr.
Justice Ross, Colonel Vernon, Sir Frederick Shaw, Bart., D.S.O., Sir
Maurice Dockrell, Mr. Richard Dowse, Colonel Gore-Lindsay, Colonel
Finlay, Sir Thomas Drew, R.H.A., Sir Charles Cameron, C.B., &c.

'Lunch was served immediately afterwards, and was presided over by the
Earl of Meath, K.P., who was supported on his right by H.R.H. the Duke
of Connaught, K.P., the Earl of Drogheda, Major-General Vetch, C.V.O.,
and Mr. Justice Ross, P.C.; and on his left by Lord Grenfell, G.C.B.,
Commander-in-Chief of the Forces in Ireland; Viscount Iveagh, K.P.;
Major-General Sir Herbert Plumer, K.C.B.; Lieut.-Colonel Sir F. Shaw,
D.S.O., 5th Royal Dublin Fusiliers. There were also present:--

'Sir G. Holmes, K.C.V.O.; Col. Vernon, D.L.; Brig.-Gen. Hammersley,
Col. Lindsay, D.L.; Brig.-Gen. Monro, C.B.; Col. R. St. L. Moore,
C.B.; Lieut.-Col. Hackett, 4th R.D.F.; Sir Daniel Hegarty, Captain
Seymour, A.D.C.; Sir T. Myles, Major D. C. Courtney, Alderman Cotton,
D.L.; Mr. Gerald M'Guinness, Col. Doyly Battley, Capt. Cameron, Dr.
Wheeler, Mr. G. S. Dockrell, Capt. Halahan, Col. Chapman, 1st R.D.F.;
Sir Horace Plunkett, P.C.; Col. Finlay, Sir John Arnott, Brig.-Gen.
Cooper, C.B.; Mr. G. A. Stevenson, M.O.; Col. Hutcheson Poe, D.L.; Mr.
P. Hanson, Sir John Moore, Major Carington Smith, Major Domville,
D.L.; Col. Lyster Smythe, D.L., A.D.C.; Major Skeet, Capt. Garvice,
Capt. Thompson, Mr. H. M. Dockrell, Mr. Wm. Graham, Mr. John Laverty,
Col. F. P. English, D.S.O., 2nd R.D.F.; Mr. R. Dowse, B.L.; Major-Gen.
Sir John Maxwell, K.C.B.; T. A. O'Farrell, J.P.; Surg.-Gen. Edge,
C.B.; Col. the Hon. E. Lawless, Col. O'Neill, 3rd R.D.F.; Sir W.
Watson, D.L.; Col. Colville Frankland, Major Lowndes, Mr. James F.
Darcy, D.L.; Mr. J. H. Pentland, R.H.A.; Mr. Key, A.D.C.; Mr. J. A.
Pigott, Mr. Robert Mitchell, Mr. R. H. A. M'Comas, Mr. Major Gorman,
Mr. George Healy, Mr. R. Tyson, Mr. R. A. Falconer, Major-Gen.
Bunbury, C.B.; Sir Maurice Dockrell, Brig.-Gen. Mills, C.B.; Sir John
Ross of Bladensburg, K.C.B.; Sir T. Drew, R.H.A.; Sir G. Moyers, D.L.;
the Hon. M. Ponsonby, A.D.C.; Sir William Thomson, Sir C. Cameron,
C.B.; Sir L. Ormsby, Col. D. Browne, Mr. R. H. Jephson, Major Knight,
Mr. A. E. Kennedy, Mr. W. A. Shea, Mr. Milward Jones, Mr. F. J. Usher,
Mr. J. H. Reid, Mr. Henry L. Barnardo, Mr. R. P. Jephson.

'After lunch, which was admirably served,

'The Earl of Meath arose, amidst applause, and said:--"The toast list
to-day is short, and contains but one toast, that of The King
(applause). His Majesty King Edward occupies a position amongst rulers
which is absolutely unique. He not only rules over twelve million
square miles, one-sixth of the earth's surface, and governs four
hundred millions of subjects of all races, colours, creeds, and
conditions of civilisation, from the most advanced to the most
backward, but he is a Monarch whose personal qualities are of so
distinguished an order that he has come to be regarded as a statesman
of the first rank (applause). The world watches His Majesty's
movements with breathless interest. Under his masterful touch
international difficulties which seem insuperable are solved,
political sores are healed. His presence seems to breathe the spirit
of peace and of goodwill, so that when he undertakes a journey it
needs no strong imagination to picture to oneself the Angel of Peace
hovering over his footsteps with healing in her wings (applause). King
Edward is no stranger to Ireland; certainly not to Dublin (renewed
applause). We knew him and loved him as Prince of Wales, and our
affection for him has only increased since he became King, and since
we recognised that Ireland and the Irish are as dear to him as he is
to us (applause). We are an open-hearted race, and on each occasion
that he has visited these shores, his kindly, sympathetic, and genial
nature has captivated our hearts. He is just such a monarch as we love
(applause). May he be long spared to reign over us and may he often
grace this island with his genial and captivating presence." (Loud
applause.)

'The toast was duly honoured, and the festive proceedings terminated.


  'INAUGURATION CEREMONY BY THE DUKE OF CONNAUGHT.
               BRILLIANT FUNCTION.

'Brilliant and strikingly picturesque was the ceremony of unveiling
the Royal Dublin Fusiliers' war memorial in St. Stephen's Green, which
took place at four o'clock this afternoon. The weather was,
fortunately, bright, although inclined to be showery, and no heavy
rain fell at any stage to mar the success of the interesting
proceedings, which were attended by a very large and distinguished
gathering. Long before the ceremony commenced, a great crowd had
assembled in the Green and its vicinity.

[Illustration: The Memorial Arch, Dublin.

Erected to the Memory of the Officers, N.C.O.'s. and Men of The Royal
Dublin Fusiliers.

Opened by H.R.H. The Duke of Connaught, K.G., etc., Colonel-in-Chief

The Royal Dublin Fusiliers, August 19th, 1907.]

'The military arrangements were of a most elaborate nature, and
thoroughly in keeping with the occasion. The troops of the Dublin
Garrison and representative detachments of the Line and Militia
battalions of the Royal Dublin Fusiliers were drawn up in the vicinity
of the Memorial Arch, and presented a very imposing appearance. There
was also a representative gathering of ex-soldiers who had served in
the Royal Dublin Fusiliers during the South African war and of members
of the Veterans' Club, who were accommodated in special places
reserved for them on the outside of the arch. After the troops had
been drawn up, the massed bands of the 13th Infantry Brigade played
a number of pleasing selections whilst awaiting the arrival of H.R.H.
the Duke of Connaught.

'The magnificent monument, which takes the form of a triumphal arch
spanning the north-west corner of St. Stephen's Green, was greatly
admired by the crowd. The noble archway is undoubtedly a most
beautiful and artistic ornament to the city. Twelve feet in width, it
springs from rusticated piers, each intersected by a pedestal and a
pair of pilasters supporting a Doric entablature. The frieze bears on
its four elevations the names in gold of the principal actions in the
South African War in which the regiment took part. The entablature is
surmounted by an Attic storey broken over the pilasters, and bearing
two inscription panels. The front keystone supports a bronze
cartouche, flanked by branches of bay bearing the arms of the
regiment. Within the arch appear the names of the gallant 212 who
perished in the war.

'Loud cheers were raised when, at a quarter to four o'clock,
Field-Marshal H.R.H. the Duke of Connaught arrived on the scene and
was received with a Royal salute. He was accompanied by the Right Hon.
the Earl of Meath, President of the Memorial Committee; General the
Lord Grenfell, K.C.B.; Sir George Holmes, K.C.V.O.; the members of the
committee, and others who had attended the luncheon at the Shelbourne
Hotel. More cheers rose from the expectant gathering when, a few
minutes later, their Excellencies the Lord Lieutenant and the Countess
of Aberdeen arrived, and were received with a Royal salute. The flag
on the Memorial Arch was then half-masted, and the order was given for
the troops to "reverse arms" and "rest on their arms reversed." The
massed bands of the 13th Infantry Brigade played the "Dead March in
Saul," after which "Oft in the Stilly Night" was played by the band of
the 2nd Battalion Royal Dublin Fusiliers. The massed bugles of the
13th Infantry Brigade then sounded "The Last Post," and the flag on
the Memorial Arch was mast-headed.

'His Excellency the Lord Lieutenant extended a hearty welcome to the
Duke of Connaught, and congratulated the Memorial Committee, and every
one connected with the undertaking, upon the successful manner in
which it had been carried out.

'The Earl of Meath, in requesting his Royal Highness the Duke of
Connaught to open the gates of the archway, said:--"Your Royal
Highness, we meet to-day for the purpose of honouring the memory of
the gallant men belonging to the Royal Dublin Fusiliers who sacrificed
their lives for King and country in the late South African war. By the
aid of subscriptions raised throughout the city and county of Dublin
and its neighbourhood, a large sum of money has been collected, and I
trust that your Royal Highness will agree with the general opinion
that a very handsome and satisfactory memorial has been raised, worthy
of the heroes whose fame it is destined to perpetuate. As the only
surviving brother of the gracious and mighty Sovereign whose uniform
these heroes wore when they died in the defence of their country's
interests, and as Colonel of the regiment in which they so faithfully
served, it is fit and proper that you, Sir, should have been invited
to perform the ceremony of opening the gates of the arch erected to
their memory. We who have been actively concerned with the erection of
the memorial most sincerely and gratefully thank your Royal Highness
for the honour you have done the regiment by thus personally
identifying yourself with the effort to keep fresh in the minds of
their fellow-countrymen the gallant deeds performed by those heroes
whom to-day we delight to honour. Irish gallantry and Irish fidelity
to King and country are well known. Wherever British arms have
penetrated, there the record of Irish valour need not be sought in
brass or stone, but in the soil itself, which has been made
sacred to Erin's sons by the knowledge that it holds the mortal
remains of hearts which have been faithful to duty and to high ideals
of Irish valour even to the gates of death. But, sir, it may safely be
said that not in the Peninsula, nor in India--where this regiment
under its old title, in a hundred fights never knew the meaning of the
word defeat--did Irish soldiers ever cover themselves with greater
glory than did the Dublin Fusiliers in the battles of South
Africa--Talana, Colenso, Tugela Heights, Hart's Hill, Ladysmith, and
Laing's Nek. These glorious contests are commemorated on the memorial
arch which your Royal Highness will shortly declare open. Situated in
the centre of the Irish capital this memorial, recording the gallant
deeds of brave men, will be an ever-present reminder to coming
generations of the citizens of Dublin of the obligations of loyalty,
of faithfulness to duty and to honour which Ireland demands of all her
sons. I have the honour, sir, on behalf of the Dublin Fusilier
Memorial Committee, to ask your Royal Highness to declare the gates of
the archway to be open."

'As his Royal Highness formally opened the gate, the massed bands
played the National Anthem.

'Headed by H.R.H. the Duke of Connaught, the troops then marched
through the arch with bayonets fixed, the Royal Dublin Fusiliers
leading, and the other battalions following in regimental seniority,
headed by their bands. Loud cheers were raised as the soldiers passed
out into Grafton Street, and proceeded down that thoroughfare, which
was thickly lined on either side with spectators. At College Green the
troops separated, and marched off to their respective quarters.

       *       *       *       *       *

'The memorial which was inaugurated to-day forms a handsome addition
to the ornamental architecture of the city. It stands in one of the
most prominent and most beautiful parts of the city, and is a striking
adornment to the main entrance to Stephen's Green Park. The luxuriant
trees and foliage of the park form a capital background to the fine
imposing arch, the design for which was suggested by Sir Thomas Drew,
composed entirely of Irish granite; the height of the memorial is
thirty-two feet six inches, and the breadth twenty-seven feet three
inches. The ornamental iron gates leading into the principal
carriage-drive of the park are cast out of metal taken from guns
captured by the British Army from enemies in the past, and suspended
over the keystone there will be an interesting trophy consisting of
the Crest and Arms of the regiment. In front a large millstone will
bear the inscription:--

  FORTISSIMIS SUIS MILITIBUS
      HOC MONUMENTUM
  EBLANA DEDICAVIT. MCMVI.[21]

         [Footnote 21: 'To her brave soldiers Dublin has dedicated
         this Monument. 1906.']

'In big letters in the frieze appear the names of the important
battles in which the battalions of the regiment took part, and on the
back of the arch the inscription:--"In memory of the officers,
non-commissioned officers, and men of the Royal Dublin Fusiliers who
died in the service of the country during the South African War,
1899-1902."

'The Earl of Meath, H.M.L., President of the Memorial Committee, and
his colleagues, including the Earl of Drogheda, Sir Maurice Dockrell,
Sir Thomas Drew, Colonel Gore Lindsay, and Colonel Vernon, are to be
congratulated upon the successful result of their indefatigable
efforts. When the project was first mooted, it met with enthusiastic
support, and the necessary sum of 1800_l._ was quickly raised to cover
the cost of erection.

'The plans were designed by Mr. Howard Pentland, of the Board of
Works, in consultation with Sir Thomas Drew, and Messrs. Laverty &
Son, Belfast, carried out the contract.

'The losses of the 1st and 2nd Battalions of this famous regiment in
the Boer war totalled 31 officers and 655 non-commissioned officers
and men. The glorious and inspiring deeds performed by these two
battalions during the terrible engagements which led to the relief of
Ladysmith are still fresh in the memory of their proud countrymen.
Throughout the whole of the arduous campaign, indeed, the regiment
nobly upheld the finest tradition of the Irish soldier, and gained the
admiration and respect of friend and foe alike. The 5th Battalion
lost, in several minor engagements, two officers and ten men killed,
and eight wounded.'




EPILOGUE.


With the opening of the Memorial the curtain drops on the last scene
of the drama of the South African war, and the regiment's share in it.
To the large majority of those present the ceremony was probably
merely a spectacular entertainment, but its real significance was
borne fully home to us, even without the sight of more than one poor
woman, silently weeping from the re-opening of the never-healed wound
in her heart. For there is nothing truer than that a victory is only
less terrible than a defeat, and as the sad strains of the wailing
music fell on our ears, our thoughts flew back through the many happy
years of good-comradeship we had spent with the gallant friends whom
we have never ceased to mourn, and whose names will be treasured
memories as long as the regiment endures.

But with the opening of the gates by our Colonel-in-Chief a fresh
chapter in the history of the regiment commenced, and all that remains
for us who share in the triumph of the present is to emulate in the
future the noble deeds of those who gave their lives in willing,
cheerful sacrifice for their sovereign, their country, and their
regiment.




THE END.

[Illustration: The South African Memorial, Natal.]




APPENDIX


I.

ROLL OF DEATH CASUALTIES.

KILLED IN ACTION.

   No. Rank and Name.    Place of        Cause.       Date.    Remarks.
                         Death.
  ----+-----------------+---------------+------------+--------+--------
       Capt. Weldon      Talana Hill     Killed in
                                         action       20/10/99
  5103 Pte. Cahill         "                "            "
  5794  " Merrill          "                "            "
  5933  " Crotty           "                "            "
  5918  " Callaghan        "                "            "
  5795  " Balfe          Chieveley          "         15/11/99 Armoured
                                                                 Train
  5031  " Birney           "                "            "        "
  5546  " O'Shea         Colenso            "          1/11/99 While on
                                                                 patrol, M.I.
       Lieut. Henry        "                "         15/12/99
  3441 Sgt. Hayes          "                "            "
  4488 Pte. Smith          "                "            "
  5930  " Sinnott          "                "            "
  5123  " Broderick        "                "            "
  5319 L.-Cpl. Coyne       "                "            "
  5833 Pte. Dillon         "                "            "
  4795  "   Murphy         "                "            "
  4380  "   Doolan         "                "            "
  4299  "   McAlpine       "                "            "
  5044  "   Moore          "                "            "
  4560  "   Clifford       "                "            "
  4838  "   Flood          "                "            "
  6287 L.-Cpl. Gibson      "                "            "
  6134 Pte. Pearse         "                "            "
  6044 L.-Cpl. Cathcart    "                "            "
  4462 Pte. Murphy         "                "            "
  6165  "   Bennett        "                "            "
  6297  "   Campion        "                "            "
  4679  "   Bowen        Potgieter's Drift  "           8/2/00
       Capt. Hensley     Venter's Spruit    "          20/1/00
  5668 L.-Sgt. Taylor      "                "            "
       Lt.-Col. Sitwell  Hart's Hill        "          24/2/00
       Capt. Maitland      "                "            "
  4261 Cpl. Seymour        "                "            "
  4871 Pte. White          "                "            "
  5359  "   Galbraith      "                "            "
  6296  "   Allen        Pieter's Hill      "          27/2/00
  3303  "   Timmins      Hart's Hill        "          24/2/00 Militia
                                                                4th R.D.F.
  4012  "   Armstrong      "                "            "     Militia
                                                                5th R.D.F.
  2037  "   Whelan         "                "            "       "
  2872  "   Wade           "                "            "       "
  5073  "   Kinsella     Pieter's Hill      "          27/2/00
  5618  "   Purcell        "                "            "
  1769 Sgt. Brennan        "                "            "     Section 'D'
  1717 Pte. Shirwin        "                "            "     Militia
                                                                5th R.D.F.
  2327  "   Grimes         "                "            "      "
  5573  "   Tyrrell      Near Talana        "         20/10/99
  5987  Pte. Mahoney     Near Talana        "         20/10/99
  4864  " Byrne            "                "            "
  5861  " McGuire       Chieveley           "         15/11/99 Armoured train
  2112  " Kelly         Hart's Hill         "          23/2/00 Section 'D'
  6171  " Kavanagh      Colenso             "         15/12/99
  6011  Cpl. Sinnot    Steelkoolspruit      "         25/10/01
  4621  Pte. Hyland    Nr. Krugersdorp   Murdered by
                                         Boers          6/1/01 Found riddled
                                                               with bullets


II.

DIED OF WOUNDS.

   No. Rank and Name.    Place of        Cause.       Date.    Remarks.
                         Death.
  ----+-----------------+--------------+---------+--------+--------
       2nd-Lt. Genge     Talana Hill    Of wounds 21/10/99
  1166 C.-Sgt. Anderson    "               "         "
  5263 Pte. Johnston     Maritzburg        "      27/11/99 Arm. train
                                                             disaster
  3467 Clr.-Sgt. Gage      "               "      20/12/99 Battle of Colenso
  6293 Pte. Crosbie      Spearman's Cmp    "       26/1/00   " Venter's Spruit
  1823  " Finnegan       Hart's Hill       "       25/2/00 Section 'D'
   219  " Oldham         Chieveley         "        3/3/00 Battle of Hart's
                                                             Hill
  3648  " Norton         Maritzburg        "        2/3/00 Battle of Hart's
                                                             Hill
  5745  " Brady          Colenso           "          "    Battle of Pieter's
                                                             Hill
  6299  " Kelly          Maritzburg        "        8/3/00 Battle of Pieter's
                                                             Hill
  5349  " Bracken          "               "       16/3/00 Battle of Hart's
                                                             Hill
  3094 Sgt. Broughton    Dundee            "      22/10/99 Battle of Talana
  2753 Pte. Frahill        "               "      28/11/99   "           "
  4029  " Quirke         Colenso           "        1/3/00   "       Colenso
  5706  " McEvoy         Johannesburg      "      11/11/01
  6347  " Nugent         Bakenlaagte       "      31/10/01
  5710  " Keegan         Dthala            "       8/10/03


III.

DEATHS BY DISEASE.

   No. Rank and Name.    Place of        Cause.       Date.    Remarks.
                         Death.
  ----+-----------------+---------------+------------+--------+--------

  5102 Pte. Phelan       Frere           Enteric      24/12/99
   642 Q.M.S. Hynes      Maritzburg      Pneumonia      7/1/00
  2865 Sgt. Linehan      Pretoria        Dysentery    16/12/99
  5519 Pte. Brennan      Maritzburg      Abscess liver  7/1/00
  3498  " Dunphy           "             Dysentery     19/1/00
  6129  " Homan          Mooi River      Enteric       22/2/00
  4593  " Keating          "               "           15/2/00
  5368  " Walsh          Cape Town       Tumour brain 26/11/99
  2775  " Ward           Ladysmith       Enteric        7/2/00
  5317  " Maher          Estcourt          "            8/3/00
  6510  " Tobin          Ladysmith       Dysentery     22/3/00
  5909  " Dixon            "               "           25/3/00
  5801  " Martin         Chieveley         "           24/4/00
  5790 Pte. Greene       Mooi River      Enteric       15/4/00
       2nd Lt. Dennis    Aliwal North      "            2/5/00
  1600 Pte. O'Brien        "               "              "    3rd R.D. Fus.
  4791  "   O'Connor     Mooi River        "            3/5/00
  5200  "   Hart           "             Fractured thigh
                                                        1/5/00
  3380  "   Cummings     Aliwal North    Enteric pneumonia
                                                        5/5/00 3rd R.D. Fus.
  3760  "   Keogh        Chieveley       Enteric          "
  4012  "   Mack         Aliwal North      "           12/5/00
  5847  "   O'Carroll      "             Enteric phthisis
                                                       15/5/00
  4566  "   Gray         Kimberley       Enteric       17/5/00
  5622  "   Corr         Maritzburg      Ague          28/2/00
  4131 Cpl. Looney       Woolwich        Dysentery     24/3/00
       Lieut. Ely        At sea          Enteric       15/4/00
  6049 Pte. Neill        Kimberley         "           23/5/00
  6309 L.-Cpl. McGinley    "               "            8/6/00
  6608 Pte. Behan          "               "           19/6/00
  4686  "   Ears         Wynberg           "           25/6/00
  7049  "   Roach        Heidelberg      Pneumonia     14/7/00
  5881  "   Pooley         "             Enteric       18/7/00
  4499 O.R.S. Hanrahan   Maritzburg      g.s. skull     2/7/00 Suicide
  5873 Pte. Hunt         At sea          Enteric       26/4/00
  3998  "   Kenny        Krugersdorp     Pneumonia     12/9/00
  1741  "   Burke        Johannesburg      "           11/9/00 Section 'D'
  4737 Cpl. Wilson       Maritzburg        "          27/10/00
  5741 Pte. Dwyer        Germiston       Enteric      31/10/00
  5697  "   Davis        Pretoria                     29/11/00 Died in
                                                                 hospital,
                                                                 prisoner
                                                                 of war
  5181  "   Clark        Kaalfontein     Lightning    24/11/00
  6800  "   Connor       Johannesburg    Enteric      25/11/00
  5967  "   Sutton       Krugersdorp     Jaundice      18/1/00
  2961  "   Ambrose      Johannesburg    Enteric        3/2/01
  6770  "   Cassidy      Bloemfontein      "           22/3/01
  1346  "   Hanlon       Maritzburg        "            5/4/00
  6109  "   Buckley      Cork            Insane
  3910 L.-Cpl. Stewart   Gaskraal          "           28/8/01
  6491 Pte. O'Connor       "               "              "
  5532  "   Peel         Krugersdorp     Enteric       14/8/01
  4657  "   Mooney         "               "          22/12/01
  5397  "   Melia        Kroonstad         "          27/12/01
  5540  "   Quinn        Krugersdorp     Drowned       14/1/02
  6028 Sgt. Pearson      At sea          Enteric        7/2/02
  5303 Pte. Furlong      Aden            Heat apoplexy 29/5/02
  4938  "   Moore          "             Heart disease  9/8/02
  4921 Sgt. Smith          "             Syncope       13/9/02
  4565 Pte. Dunne          "             Multiple  neuritis
                                                      10/10/02
  5686  "   Gray                         Diseased liver
                                                      11/10/02
  3661  "   Mooney       Krugersdorp     Enteric        6/7/01 4th R.D. Fus.
  6332  "   Merrigan     Aden              "           8/11/02
  7547 Boy Roberts       Dthala          Pneumonia      8/3/03
  7182 Pte. Dempsey        "             Enteric      13/10/03
  5944  "   Wynne        Aden            Consumption    2/3/04


IV.

LIST OF WOUNDED.

   Reg.
   No. Rank and Name.    Date.      Place.      Nature of Wound. Remarks.
  ----+-----------------+---------+------------+----------------+---------
       Capt. M. Lowndes  20/10/99  Talana       g.s. leg
         "   Dibley          "        "         g.s. head
       Lieut. Perreau        "        "         g.s. shoulder
  5686 Pte. Gray             "        "
  2753  "   Frahill          "        "
  5310  "   Black            "        "
  4815  "   Doyle            "        "
  4700  "   Leonard          "        "
  4894 Sgt. Grace            "        "
  5430 Pte. Babester         "        "
  5317  "    Maher           "        "
  4790  "    O'Brien         "        "
  5047  "    Greer           "        "
  4359  "    Smith           "        "
  4699  "    Callaghan       "        "
  4931  "    Righton         "        "
  5947  "    Dwyer           "        "
    43 Sgt.-Maj. Burke       "        "
  3770 Col.-Sgt McNeice      "        "
  5426 Sgt. Walton           "        "
  3139  "    McKenna         "        "
  6264 Pte. Carroll          "        "
  6125  "    Dempsey         "        "
  5038  "    Richardson      "        "
  5523  "    Ryan            "        "
  4620  "    Summerville     "        "
  5635  "    Tracey          "        "
  6084  "    Brady           "        "
  4910 Dmr. Brudnell         "        "
  5078 Pte. Gorman           "        "
  5643  "    Cullen          "        "
  5011  "    Brennan         "        "
  4382  "    Jordan          "        "
  4766  "    Murphy          "        "
  4592  "    Cullen          "        "
  6096  "    Gilhooley       "        "
  3704  "    Kearns          "        "
  4857  "    Butler          "        "
  4767  "    Byrne           "        "
  6022  "    Cassin          "        "
  5156  "    Fitzpatrick     "        "
  5118  "    Magee           "        "
  5142  "    Murray          "        "
  5063  "    Kelly           "        "
  5595  "    Reynolds        "        "
  4948  "    Wilby           "        "
  2156 Cpl. Hogan            "        "
  5634 L.-Cpl. Keenan        "        "
  4593 Pte. Flood            "        "
  5137  "    McGrath         "        "
  4785  "    Hopkins         "        "
  5531  "    Hatt            "        "
  4444  "    Creegan         "        "
  4347  "    Lahey           "        "
  5914  "    Coyle       15/11/99  Armr. Train  shell, arm
       Capt. Shewan      15/12/99  Colenso      g.s. thigh
  4341 Sgt. Doherty          "        "         g.s. shoulders
  4986 L.-Sgt. Gibbons       "        "         g.s. arm
  5668  "       Taylor       "        "         g.s. shoulder
  3150 Sgt. Towey            "        "         g.s. hand and foot
   501  "    Hamilton        "        "         g.s. foot
  5108  "    Bodkin          "        "         g.s. leg
  5628 L.-Sgt. Church        "        "         g.s. leg
  5374 Cpl. Loughran         "        "         g.s. thigh
  6684 Pte. O'Brien          "        "         g.s. hand
  5117  "    Lillis          "        "         g.s. foot
  4589  "    Whelan          "        "         g.s. hand
  5637  "    Taylor          "        "         g.s. thigh
  4898  "    Walker          "        "         g.s. head
  5687  "    Enright         "        "         g.s. hand
  5869  "    Mackey          "        "         g.s. knee
  5584  "    Carr            "        "         g.s. hip
  6145  "    Byrne           "        "         g.s. elbow
  6103  "    Cooney          "        "         g.s. foot
  4997  "    Ludlow          "        "         g.s. arm
  4201 Dmr. Webb             "        "         g.s. thigh
  5970 L.-Cpl. Cooper        "        "         g.s. leg
  6094  "    Hanley          "        "         g.s. leg
  5760 Pte. Brown            "        "         g.s. leg
  5765  "    Welsh           "        "         g.s. foot
  4545  "    Flood           "        "         g.s. thigh
  4959  "    Smith           "        "         g.s. hand
  5672  "    Sanders         "        "         g.s. leg
  5661  "    Murphy          "        "         g.s. foot
  4582  "    McCarthy        "        "         g.s. head
  4395  "    Ellis           "        "         g.s. arm
  4290 Sgt. Hunt             "        "         g.s. wrist and thigh
  4987 Pte. Reilly           "        "
  4552  "    Kelly           "        "         g.s. thigh
  3362 Dmr. Murphy           "        "
  4411 Pte. Murray           "        "
  5716  "    Lahey           "        "
  6038  "    Kelly           "        "
  3013 Sgt. Healey           "        "
  4726 Pte. O'Brien          "        "
  5848  "    Townsend        "        "
  5834 Pte. McBride          "        "         g.s. hip
  5520  " Hackett            "        "
  4441 L.-Sgt. Merry         "        "         g.s. thigh
  5023 L.-Cpl. Hayes         "        "         g.s. feet
  4543 Pte. Keating          "        "         g.s. foot
  6123  " Kelly              "        "
  4800  " Walsh              "        "
  4226  " Reilly             "        "         g.s. hand
  6137  " O'Brien            "        "         g.s. thigh
  2442  " Leary              "        "
  5151  " Clark              "        "
       Maj. English       20/1/00  Vent. Spruit g.s. leg
  6105 L.-Cpl. Kidd          "        "         g.s. neck
  6796 Pte. Burke            "        "         g.s. foot
  6285  " Healey             "        "         g.s. back
  3141  " Rooney             "        "         g.s. arm
  4644  " Burke              "        "         g.s. hip, thigh
  5997  " Davis              "        "         g.s. thigh, leg
  5458  " Burke              "        "         g.s. neck
  5873  " Hunt               "        "         g.s. head
  5659  " Walsh              "        "         g.s. leg
  5069  " Lee                "        "         g.s. hand
  6121  " Brien              "        "         g.s. thigh
  2892 L.-Sgt. Ryan       21/1/00     "         g.s. foot
  3548 Sgt. Cragg            "        "         g.s. hand
  6047 Pte. Cole             "        "         g.s. arm
  6391  " Richardson         "        "         g.s. foot
  4898 L.-Cpl. Walker        "        "
  6366 Pte. Molloy           "        "         g.s. right leg
  6310  " Gibney             "        "         g.s. leg
  5883  " Marshall           "        "         g.s. hand
  5283  " Shaughnessey       "        "         g.s. left leg
  5904  " Edwards            "        "         g.s. right hand
  4636 Cpl. Reynolds         "        "         g.s. chin
  4368 Pte. Githens          "        "         g.s. arm
  5056  " Lordan          22/1/00     "         g.s. thigh
  4794  " Murray          23/1/00     "         g.s. right forearm
  4689 L.-Sgt. O'Higgins     "        "         g.s. chest
  4384 Pte. Ring             "        "         g.s. head, shoulder
  5888  " Kenny              "        "         g.s. head, shoulder
  6484  " Duffy              "        "         g.s. hip
  5882 Sgt.-Dmr. Smith    25/1/00     "
  5900 Pte. Mason            "        "         g.s. hand
  6569  " Conroy             "        "         g.s. foot
       2nd Lieut. Lane    23/2/00  Hart's Hill  g.s. head
        " Dennis             "        "         g.s. left leg
  2872 Pte. Wade             "        "                          5th R.D. Fus.
  4012  " Armstrong          "        "
  3303  " Timmins            "        "
  5167 Pte. McDonnell        "        "
  5928  "   Pender           "        "         g.s. right hand
  4791  "   Connor           "        "         g.s. chest
  4817  "   Iliffe           "        "
  4559  "   McCabe           "        "
  2426  "   O'Beirne         "        "
  6522  "   Ryan             "        "         g.s. right hip   1st Battalion
  5461 L.-Cpl. Dennehy       "        "
  5387 Pte. Brannagan        "        "         g.s. chest
  4771  "   Johnston         "        "         g.s. left thigh
  5765  "   Ward             "        "         g.s. arm and knee
  4557  "   McCarthy         "        "         g.s. back
  5811  "   Ryan             "        "         g.s. arm
  2921  "   Thompson         "        "
  6355  "   Fagan            "        "
   148  "   Metcalf          "        "         g.s. right arm   5th R.D. Fus.
  2096  "   Farrell          "        "
  1557  "   Kinsella         "        "
  4530  "   Brown            "        "         g.s. groin
  5684  "   Hetherston       "        "         g.s. chest
  6333  "   Newsome          "        "         g.s. left arm
  3631  "   McDonald         "        "         g.s. left shoulder
  1997  "   Brady            "        "                          5th R.D. Fus.
  6110  "   Kelly            "        "
  2387  "   Strain           "        "         g.s. buttock
  3068  "   Adams            "        "
  5069  "   Lee              "        "
  4424  "   Mulvaney         "        "
  4621  "   Hyland           "        "         g.s. left thigh
  5836  "   Cullen           "        "         g.s. right wrist
  3313  "   Concannon        "        "         g.s. right shoulder
  6498  "   Flannagan        "        "         g.s. chest
  1741  "   Burke            "        "         g.s. left arm
  2422  "   Morgan           "        "
  2787  "   Brien            "        "         g.s. left knee
  4325  "   Curran           "        "         g.s. left leg
  6108  "   Bernes           "        "
  5908  "   McDonald         "        "
  1881  "   Reynolds         "        "                          4th R.D. Fus.
  4015  "   Lynch            "        "
  2348  "   Maddox           "        "         g.s. left shoulder
  4029  "   Quirk            "        "
  6217  "   Valentine        "        "
  3881  "   Talbot           "        "
  6314  "   Early            "        "
  5224  "   McNeill          "        "
  4277  "   Mack             "        "
  4994  "   Knoctor          "        "         g.s. right leg
  3441  "   O'Grady          "        "         g.s. left hand   4th R.D. Fus.
  5982  "   Tighe            "        "         g.s. head
  347   "   Doyle            "        "         g.s. left hand
  6130  "   Mason            "        "                          3rd R.D. Fus.
  5141  "   Kirwan           "        "         g.s. right foot
  4569  "   Gorman        27/2/00  Pieter's Hill
                                                g.s. shoulder
  5399  "   Connor           "        "
  5828  "   Kegney           "        "
   847  "   Mangan           "        "                          3rd R.D. Fus.
  1716  "   Quinn            "        "                                "
  5716  "   Leahy            "        "
  5981  "   Broad            "        "
  5698  "   Toomey           "        "
   350  "   Murphy           "        "                          3rd R.D. Fus.
  1846  "   Kealey           "        "                                "
  4741  "   Moore            "        "
  4903 Cpl. Marshall         "        "
  5379 Pte. Pryor            "        "
  2368  "   Byrne            "        "
  4878  "   Clark            "        "
  6524  "   Quaid            "        "
  1554  "   Brennan          "        "                          5th R.D. Fus.
  5757  "   Kelly            "        "
  5284  "   Farrell          "        "                          5th R.D. Fus.
  3361  "   Brady            "        "                                "
  1765  "   Fagan            "        "
  6429  "   Fox              "        "
  4777  "   Mullane          "        "
  3253  "   Mellington       "        "                          5th R.D. Fus.
  5280  "   Daly             "        "
   639  "   Whelan           "        "                          5th R.D. Fus.
  6139  "   Dignam           "        "
  2917  "   Ferris           "        "                          5th R.D. Fus.
  3242  "   McHale           "        "                                "
  3266  "   Evans            "        "
  1377  "   Farrell          "        "
  4474  "   McLoughlin       "        "
  6113  "   McCormack        "        "
  1651  "   Kinsella         "        "                          5th R.D. Fus.
  3639  "   Brien            "        "                                "
  3282  "   O'Brien          "        "         g.s. hand
  1846  "   Gradwell         "        "                          5th R.D. Fus.
   174  "   Lawless          "        "         g.s. foot, right hand  "
  1284  "   Molloy           "        "                                "
  1508  "   Donnelly         "        "
  5704  "   Kennedy          "        "
  2236  "   Tuite            "        "         g.s. right heel  5th R.D. Fus.
  4317  "   Carpenter        "        "
  3231  "   Mallon        21/7/00  Zuikerbosch  g.s. right thigh 4th R.D. Fus.
  2853  "   O'Brien          "        "         g.s. left thigh        "
  1143 Pte. Stanton          "        "                          4th R.D. Fus.
  2961 Col.-Sgt. Cossey      "        "
       Maj. English          "        "         slight shell splinter, eye
  6786 Pte. Reilly        15/9/00  Nr. Frdkstdt.                 On convoy duty
  2392 Sgt. James         21/9/00     "         very slight g.s. leg
  6070 Pte. Angleton      2/10/00  Near Irene   g.s. foot        With M.I.
       Lieut. Haskard     27/2/00  Pieter's Hill
                                                right elbow
       2nd Lieut. Bradford   "        "         shoulder
  2692 Pte. Doyle        31/12/00  Nr. Krugersdorp
                                                g.s. buttock
  5767  "   Lang             "     Nooitgedacht
  2052  "   Armstrong      2/2/01  Gatsrand     g.s. left arm, very slight
  6265  "   Roach            "        "         g.s. right leg, slight
  4981  "   Sheehan          "     Nr. Carolina g.s. neck
  5718  "   Kavanagh         "        "         g.s. left knee
  4365  "   Moran            "        "         g.s. left shoulder
  4680  "   Fitzgerald       "        "         g.s. left arm
  6057  "   Goff             "        "         g.s. chest
  5433  "   Holmes        28/8/01  Gaskraal
  4840  "   Nolan            "        "
  4858  "   Butler        27/7/01  Nr. Wonderfontein
  4680  "   Fitzgerald   25/10/01  Swartzfontein
                                                g.s. hand, severe
  5706  "   McEvoy           "        "         g.s. buttock, groin
  3761 Sgt. Carroll      30/10/01  Bakenlaagte  g.s. leg, very slight
  4473 Pte. Hand             "        "         g.s. knee, severe
  4448  "   Murphy           "        "         g.s. foot, slight
  4513  "   Connor           "        "         g.s. hip, severe
  5706  "   Moran            "        "         g.s. hand, severe
  6347  "   Nugent           "        "         g.s. abdomen
  4686 Cpl. Curtis       15/12/99  Colenso      g.s. hand
  5548 Pte. Metcalf          "        "         g.s. left leg
  4453  "   White            "        "         g.s. both legs
  6330 L.-Cpl. Matthews   21/1/00  Vent. Spruit g.s. leg
  5330 Pte. Holohan       27/2/00  Pieter's Hill
  5973 Cpl. Gaffney       7/10/03  Aden Hntlnd. g.s. severe, foot
  6367 Pte. Daly             "        "         g.s. very slight
  5584  "   Carr             "        "         g.s. severe, chest


V.

BATTLE OF TALANA.

REPORTED MISSING SINCE OCTOBER 21ST, 1899.

  Reg. No.   Rank and Name.
  ---------+-----------------
    2615     Clr.-Sgt. Gage
    2078     Sgt. Martin
    4388      "   Guilfoyle
    3761      "   Carroll
    5328     L.-Sgt. Payne
    5178      "      Crean
    5094     Cpl. Corrigan
    5544      "   Richards
    6028      "   Pearson
    5004      "   Kiernan
    5601     L.-Cpl. Lee
    5143      "   Flynn
    5304      "   Whelan
    4812      "   Lyons
    4868      "   Green
    5033      "   Byrne
    4947      "   Harper
    4638     Pte. Mahon
    4966      "   Murphy
    4359      "   Hall
    4655      "   Cullen
    5175      "   Reddy
    5143      "   Flynn
    5759      "   Dowling
    5070      "   Angleton
    5402      "   Rourke
    5209      "   Dunne
    5793      "   Murphy
    4513      "   Connor
    5055      "   Reidy
    5609      "   Connor
    5162      "   Macken
    5929      "   Carroll
    5956      "   Rourke
    4498      "   Watts
    4884      "   Kenny
    5876      "   Molloy
    5647      "   Harrison
    6087      "   Tyrrell
    4788      "   Toomey
    4366      "   Doyle
    5931      "   Bracken
    3752      "   Travers
    5733      "   Kavanagh
    6055      "   Gough
    5266      "   Bigley
    5479      "   Brien
    5489      "   Geoghegan
    6019      "   Curran
    5918      "   Callaghan
    4411      "   Cooney
    5706      "   McEvoy
    5600      "   Gleeson
    5000      "   Nulty
    4974      "   Costello
    5889      "   Keogh
    5501      "   Mannix
    5127      "   Battersby
    5352      "   White
    4864      "   Byrne
    5390      "   Doyle
    5126      "   Farrell
    5714      "   Finnigan
    5055      "   Reidy
    5345      "   Dunne
    5789      "   Flood
    4964      "   Gibney
    5987      "   Mahoney
    5030      "   Callaghan
    5126      "   Delaney
    4692      "   McGuinness
    6018      "   McDonagh
    5693      "   Keating
    4532      "   Kirwan
    6866      "   Molloy
    5427      "   Carr
    4142      "   Lyons
    6120      "   Cullen
    4927      "   Kane
    5545      "   Reilly
    5702      "   Byrne
    5724      "   Dempsey
    5218      "   Reilly
    5880      "   Carroll
    5144      "   Williams
    5027      "   Doody
    4473      "   Hand
    4566      "   Glynn
    5184      "   Dowler
    5551      "   Finn
    5912      "   Kavanagh
    5182      "   Cavanagh
    5350      "   Farrell
    4692      "   McGann


VI.

REPORTED MISSING SINCE OCTOBER 22ND, 1899.

  Reg. No.   Rank and Name.
  --------+-----------------
    5022    Pte. Rourke
    4998     "   Hawthorn
    5246     "   McGuinness
    4327     "   Neill
    5321     "   Moran


VII.

REPORTED MISSING SINCE OCTOBER 30TH, 1899.

  Reg. No.   Rank and Name.
  --------+----------------
    5524    Pte. Wall
    5503    Pte. Hennessey


VIII.

REPORTED MISSING SINCE NOVEMBER 15TH, 1899

(ARMOURED TRAIN DISASTER).

  Reg. No.   Rank and Name.
  --------+------------------
    3672    Sgt. Hassett
    5114    Cpl. Hallahan
    5800    Pte. Buckley
    6293     "   Kempster
    5499     "   Byrne
    4497     "   Barry
    5755     "   Collins
    6140     "   Dunphy
    5741     "   Dwyer
    5256     "   Kavanagh
    5691     "   O'Rourke
    5626     "   Buckley
    5968     "   Glynn
    5057     "   Kirwan
    5017     "   Pakenham
    5239     "   Herbert
    6283     "   Cragg
    5790     "   Murray
    5210     "   Rice
    5329     "   Stanton
    4680     "   Fitzgerald
    5548     "   Metcalf
    3715   Sgt.  Osborne
    5795   Pte.  Balfe
    5316     "   Daly
    5516     "   Scully
    4443     "   Hoey
    5031     "   Bierney
    5697     "   Davis
    5297     "   Drew
    5841     "   Hoy
    5287     "   Lynch
    5908     "   Murphy
    6308     "   Connell
    6116     "   Harty
    6228     "   Meehan
    5297     "   Doogan
    6319     "   Burke
    4676     "   Driscoll
    4865     "   Reynolds
    6354     "   Sheridan
    5861     "   McGuire
    4542     "   Flannagan


IX.

LIST OF OFFICERS IN NATAL CAMPAIGN.

  Rank and Name.                  Remarks.
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Col.   Cooper                   Commanding 2nd Royal Dublin Fusiliers.
  Maj.   Bird                     2nd in command.
   "     English, A Company       Wounded at Venter's Spruit and Zuikerbosch.
  Capt.  Hensley, G Company       Killed at Venter's Spruit.
   "     Weldon, E Company        Killed at Talana.
   "     Fetherstonhaugh, D Coy.  Acted as Adjutant after Capt. Lowndes
                                    was wounded.
   "     Dibley, B Company        Wounded at Talana, and sent into Intombi
                                    Hospital.
   "     Lonsdale, M.I. Company   Captured at Talana.
  Lieut. Shewan, H Company        Wounded at Colenso.
   "     Perreau                  Wounded at Talana, and sent into Intombi
                                     Hospital.
   "     Le Mesurier              Captured at Talana. Escaped from Pretoria.
   "     Grimshaw                 Captured at Talana.
   "     Cory                     Was sent with M.I. Section to Dundonald's
                                     Brigade.
   "     Renny                    Transport Officer. Left in Ladysmith.
  2nd Lieut. Haskard              Wounded at Pieter's Hill.
   "         Henry                Killed at Colenso.
   "         Frankland            Captured in Armoured Train.
   "         Genge                Killed at Talana.
  Capt. Lowndes (Adjutant)        Wounded at Talana, and sent into Intombi
                                     Hospital.
  Lieut. and Qtmr. Rowland        Went to S. A. C.
  Lieut. Garvice                  Joined battalion at Dundee; captured
                                    at Talana.
  2nd Lieut. Ely                  Joined battalion at Dundee, and died
                                    of enteric, 1900.
  Lieut. H. W. Higginson          Joined on posting, and shared in siege
                                    of Ladysmith.
  Capt. Romer                     Joined from Staff College on Oct. 30th.
  Capt. Haldane and Lieut.        The former was captured in the Armoured
    Maitland (of Gordon             Train, and escaped from
    Highlanders)                    Pretoria with Lieut. Le Mesurier;
                                    the latter killed at Hart's Hill.
  2nd Lieut. Britton              Joined on November 5th. After Colenso
                                    he acted as Transport Officer.
  Brevet-Lieut.-Col. Sitwell      Joined on November 8th, and commanded
                                    C Company. He was killed
                                    at Hart's Hill.
  2nd Lieut. Lane                 Joined on December 6th. He was
                                    wounded at Hart's Hill.


X.

_The following Officers of the 1st Battalion and other corps joined on
December 7th and subsequent dates:--_

  Rank and Name.                 Remarks.
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Maj. Hicks                     Returned to 1st Battalion after Colenso.
                                   Succeeded Col. Cooper in command
                                   of 2nd Battalion, March 1900.
   "    Gordon                   Wounded at Colenso.
  Capt. Bacon                    Killed at Colenso.
  2nd Lieut. De Salis            Promoted into another regiment.
   "         Brodhurst Hill      Wounded at Hart's Hill.
   "         Halahan
   "         Macleod             Wounded at Colenso.
   "         Winnington          (Worcestershire Regiment). Attached.
   "         Wheeler             Joined December 23rd.
   "         Dennis              Joined December 27th, and died of enteric
                                   at Aliwal North.
  Capt. Venour                   Joined on January 30th.
  Lieut. Hill                    Joined on January 30th. Wounded at
                                   Hart's Hill.
  2nd Lieut. Bradford            Joined on January 30th. Wounded at
                                   Pieter's Hill.
  Capt. Sir Frederick Frankland, (3rd Bedford Regiment). Joined on
    Bart.                          March 2nd.
  Lieut. G. S. Higginson         Joined on March 11th.
  Lieut. Nelson, R.M.L.I.        Joined on March 29th.
  Capt. Clark,      "            Joined on April 1st.

Col. C. D. Cooper took over a brigade, with Lieut. Renny as his
A.D.C., early in 1900. It will thus be seen that Capt. Fetherstonhaugh
was the only officer who was with the regiment from start to finish
who was not hit.


XI.

TOTAL CASUALTIES OF OFFICERS OF THE 1st AND 2nd BATTALION ROYAL
DUBLIN FUSILIERS.

              Name.                Nature of            Place.
                                   Casualty.
  ----------------------------+-----------------+--------------------
  Capt. Weldon                  Killed            Talana.
  Lieut. Genge                    "                  "
  Capt. Bacon                     "               Colenso.
  Lieut. Henry                    "                  "
  Capt. Hensley                   "               Venter's Spruit.
  Lt.-Col. Sitwell                "               Hart's Hill.
  Capt. Maitland (Gordon          "                    "
    Highlanders, attached)
  Capt. Macbean                   "               Nooitgedacht.
    "   Watson                    "               Western Transvaal.
  Lieut. Ely                    Died of disease
    "    Dennis                   "        "
  Capt. Dibley                  Wounded           Talana.
    "   Lowndes                   "                  "
  Lieut. Perreau                  "                  "
  Maj. Gordon                     "               Colenso.
  Capt. Shewan                    "                  "
  Lieut. Macleod                  "                  "
  Maj. English                    "               Venter's Spruit
                                                    and Zuikerbosch.
  Capt. Hill                      "               Pieter's Hill.
  Lieut. Brodhurst Hill           "                    "
    "    Lane                     "               Hart's Hill.
    "    Dennis                   "                    "
    "    Bradford.                "               Pieter's Hill.
    "    Haskard                  "                    "
  Capt. Carington Smith           "               Sanna's Post and
                                                    Heidelberg.
  Lt.-Col. Mills                  "               Alleman's Nek.
  Lieut. Seppings                 "                    "
    "    Taylor                   "               Parys.
  Capt. Kinsman                   "               Near Mafeking.
    "   Chapman                   "               Itala.
  Lieut. Lefroy                   "                 "


XII.

HONOURS AND REWARDS OF OFFICERS OF THE 2ND ROYAL DUBLIN FUSILIERS.

  C.B.

  Colonel C. D. Cooper.
     "    G. A. Mills.
     "    H. T. Hicks.


  D.S.O.

  Major S. G. Bird.
    "   W. H. O. Neill.
  Brevet-Major A. F. Pilson.
        "      W. J. Venour.
  Captain H. M. Shewan.
     "    G. N. Cory.
  Lieutenant E. A. A. De Salis.
       "     C. Garvice.
       "     Lefroy.
       "     W. F. Stirling.
       "     C. T. W. Grimshaw.
       "     A. Moore.
  Captain-Quartermaster R. Baker.


  BREVETS.

  Major F. P. English.
  Brevet-Major Godley.
  Captain McBean.
  Major A. W. Gordon.
  Captain E. Fetherstonhaugh.
     "    C. F. Romer.
     "    P. Maclear.
     "    H. Carington Smith.
  Major A. J. Chapman.
  Captain M. Lowndes.


  SPECIAL PROMOTIONS.

  Lieutenant Watson.
       "     E. A. A. De Salis.
       "     Lefroy.


XIII.

N.C.O.'S AND MEN OF 2ND ROYAL DUBLIN FUSILIERS AWARDED DISTINGUISHED
CONDUCT MEDAL.

   Reg.           Rank and Name.
   No.
  ------+--------------------------------
   3423   Sgt. M. Connor        }
   4290    "   Hunt             }
   1664    "   Sheridan         }  A.O.
          L.-Cpl. J. Kelly      } 163 of
          Pte. W. Holmes        }  1901
           "   P. Kelly         }
           "   E. Reid          }

          Sgt.-Mj. F. A. Whalen }
            5th R.D. Fus.       }
          Qmr.-Sgt. B. T. Bruen }
            5th R.D. Fus.       }
          Col.-Sgt. F. Gage     }
          Arm.-Sgt. T. H. Ford, }
            attached R.D. Fus.  }
          Sgt. W. Brown         }
   2892    "   J. Ryan          } A.O.
          Cpl. G. F. Frost, 1st } 15 of
             Batt. R.D. Fus.    } 1902
          L.-Cpl. Melia         }
          Pte. W. Connell       }
           "   W. Cullen        }
           "   A. Dowling       }
           "   M. Farrelly      }
           "   M. Kavanagh      }
           "   J. McCormack     }
   6642    "   C. N. Wallace    }

     43   Sgt.-Maj. J. Burke    }
   4637   Col.-Sgt. J. Ambrose  } A.O.
   5178       "     T. Crean    } 10 of
              "     M. Dunne    } 1903
          Cpl. P. Flannery      }
          Pte. P. Furlong       }

          Col.-Sgt. J. H.       }  A.O.
            Robinson, 1st Batt. } 172 of
            R.D. Fus.           }  1903


XIV.

AN ADDRESS PRESENTED BY THE NATAL UNITED IRISH ASSOCIATION.

_The Officers, Non-commissioned Officers, and Men of the 2nd Battalion
Royal Dublin Fusiliers._

The recent war, from which we welcome you back, marks another epoch of
glory in the annals of your distinguished battalion. It was our
privilege on several occasions to be favoured at social functions with
the presence of officers and men of the DUBLIN FUSILIERS, and we felt
assured that the goodness of character and disposition which shed
their radiance at those gatherings, would shine with added lustre when
in the face of danger and death. The popularity of your regiment in
Natal has only been exceeded by your distinguished gallantry in the
field, and as we followed your fortunes with feelings of deepest
interest throughout the campaign, our hearts thrilled with pride as we
read of your gallant and heroic deeds. As you held the position of
honour at the march to Lucknow, so were you by the unanimous consent
of the army awarded a similar position in the entry to Ladysmith. The
marvellous bravery displayed by your regiment in the terrible fighting
between Talana Hill and Tugela, forms a fitting sequel to your
magnificent record in the Indian Peninsula; and we as Irishmen can
take a legitimate pride in the fact that your muster-roll of glory is
replete with familiar names which abound throughout the hills and
valleys of our far-off motherland. The name and fame of your regiment
are world-wide; and whether on frozen shores or in tropical climes, a
light-heartedness, an uncomplaining endurance of hardship and fatigue,
and a ready adaptability to circumstances, afford abundant proof that
the best traditions of our race have been maintained by the DUBLIN
FUSILIERS. In the vast territories of Hindustan as in South Africa,
you have shown the world the material of which an Irish soldier is
made. In the many engagements in which you have taken part, you have
seen your enemies fall thick around you, and seen, too, the crimson
tide ebb from the heart of many a brave comrade, whose last good-bye
will remain for ever hallowed in your memory. You have returned
triumphant from this WAR, and though, alas! your numbers are fewer,
your hearts are as stout and your spirits as intrepid as ever. The
land which claims you as her sons has in proportion to her
capabilities given more hostages to glory than any land beneath the
sun, and well and nobly have you upheld that national renown. You have
won a name and _éclat_ that will go down through the ages, and with
the hope that countless honours are yet in store to further illumine
the aureole of your prestige,

We are yours faithfully,

          CHAS. DONNELLY, _President_.
          JAMES P. DONNELLY, _Hon. Treasurer_.
          E. G. O'FLAHERTY, _Hon. Secretary_.

               _Vice-Presidents_:

          CRAWFORD LINDSAY.          THOS. KELLY.
          A. TRIMBLE.                J. F. E. BARNES.

               _Committee_:

          W. P. BOWEN.            C. W. KAY EVANS.
          W. J. LYONS.            R. S. W. BARNES.
          P. O'NEILL.             J. J. O'NEILL.
          E. BUTLER.              D. LANE.
                      N. F. BLACK.


XV.

ADDRESS FROM THE EUROPEAN INHABITANTS OF ADEN TO THE MEMBERS OF THE
SERGEANTS' MESS, 2ND ROYAL DUBLIN FUSILIERS.

_To the Members of the Sergeants' Mess, 2nd Battalion Royal Dublin
Fusiliers._

We, the undersigned, take advantage of this occasion, the eve of your
departure from among us, to place on record our very high esteem of
the many sociable qualities displayed by you since your battalion
arrived in this station from South Africa in February, 1902.

Coming to Aden at a time when, after the brilliant services you had
rendered to your Sovereign and country in that uncertain field of the
reputation of battalions as well as individuals--South Africa, you
had every reason to expect a far better station, a union with those
near and dear to you, and therefore every reason to be despondent.
Instead, you threw yourselves into the social life of this place in
such a way that, before you were here many weeks, it was felt that
you, who had displayed the brilliant qualities so characteristic of
your race on many a hard-fought field in South Africa, were not
lacking in those social qualities which tend to enhance the popularity
of His Majesty's forces, and make life a little less irksome in what
all must admit is not a pleasant spot.

Words fail to express what we all feel at being compelled to say
good-bye to you, who have been more than friends to so many of us, and
in leaving Aden for return to your homeland, we assure you that you
carry with you the sincerest good wishes of all.

We shall always have a kindly feeling for you, and watch your future
with great interest, and, above all, we trust that you will find those
from whom you have so long been separated in the best of health, and
that a long life and prosperity is before you.

          W. SMITH.            F. WISEMAN.
          C. ELLIOTT.          G. C. KENNEDY.
          W. WILLOWS.          R. THORLIN.
          E. B. BATCHELOR.     H. M. HANLEY.
          T. GRAVES.           E. B. OWEN.
          R. GRIFFITHS.        J. A. RUPERT JONES.
          A. HANDY.            J. R. DEANE.
          C. A. HOLLAND.       T. W. TWADDLE.
          C. J. HOCKING.       C. O. CRAVEN.
          J. M. GILTINAN.      J. MALLIA.
          F. C. BREWIN.        J. INGLOTT.
          F. WELLS.            G. NOEL.
          E. HALL.             J. F. FIELD.
          F. J. CLAY.          E. HESSLETON.
          G. R. CHAMARETT.     F. PENHA.
          P. C. KELLY.


XVI.

EXTRACT FROM BATTALION ORDERS ISSUED AT LADYSMITH, 27/10/99.

Para. 2. Strength.--The following officers and men, killed in action
on the 20th inst. at the Battle of Talana, are struck off the
strength:--

  Capt. G. A. Weldon.

  No. 5103 Pte. P. Cahill, A Coy.
  "   5794  "   A. Merrill, E Coy.
  No. 5931 Pte. P. Crotty, E Coy.
  "   5918  "   P. Callaghan, H Coy.

Died of wounds received in action on 21st:--

  2nd Lieut. C. J. Genge.
  No. 1166 Col.-Sgt. F. Anderson, F Coy.

The Commanding Officer, while expressing his deep regret at these
casualties, can fully testify to the gallant manner in which each and
all met their death, fighting for their Queen and upholding the
regimental honour.


XVII.

EXTRACT FROM BATTALION ORDERS, DATED FRERE, 18/12/99.

Para. 3. Strength.--The following officers, N.C.O.'s, and men, having
been killed in action at Colenso on the 15th inst., are struck off the
strength of the battalion from that date:--

2ND BATTALION.

  Lieut. Robert Clive Bolton Henry.

  Reg. No.  Rank and Name.
  3441      Sgt. Hayes.
  6287      L.-Cpl. Gibson.
  6044       "   Cathcart.
  5123      Pte. Broderick.
  4488       "   Smith.
  5930       "   Sinnott.
  5833      Pte. Dillon.
  4795       "   Murphy.
  4380       "   Doolan.
  4299       "   McAlpine.
  5044       "   Moore.
  4462       "   Murphy.
  6134      Pte. Pearse.
  4560       "   Clifford.
  4838       "   Flood.
  5319      L.-Cpl. Coyne.
  6165      Pte. Bennett.

1ST BATTALION.

  Capt. Arthur Henry Bacon.

  Reg. No.  Rank and Name.
  3993      Col.-Sgt. Magee.
  3514      Sgt. Flynn.
  4869       "   Callan.
  5505      Pte. Cole.
  4301       "   Carroway.
  2943       "   O'Keefe.
  ?          "   O'Keefe.
  6472      Pte. Hayes.
  4192       "   Neill.
  3906       "   Walsh.
  4273       "   Nolan.
  3273       "   Costello.
  2504       "   Bissett.
  4193       "   Deevey.
  4095      Pte. Usher.
  3108       "   Connell.
  6002       "   Wisdom.
  4387       "   Toole.
  4242       "   Joyce.
  4672       "   Maddox.

The Commanding Officer, whilst deeply regretting, in common with all
ranks, the severe loss the regiment has sustained in the deaths of
Captain Bacon and Lieutenant Henry and the N.C.O.'s and men killed in
action at Colenso on Friday last, desires to place on record his high
appreciation of the admirable spirit displayed by all ranks in
unflinching pressing forward under a very heavy fire to the attack of
a practically impregnable position.

The names of the officers, N.C.O.'s, and men who fell will, he feels
sure, be honoured in the annals of the regiment, as having set a noble
example of fearless courage and devotion to duty.


XVIII.

                              _Colenso, 18/12/99_ (5).

TELEGRAM RE DECEASE SERGEANT LINEHAN.

  '_From Censor to G.O.C. L. of Comn._

'No. 5514 Cable from Lorenzo Marquez says that Sergeant Linehan,
Fusiliers, died Racecourse, Pretoria, of Dysentery, Friday last.
Buried Catholic Cemetery.'


XIX.

                              _Frere, 25/12/99_ (3).

THE QUEEN'S MESSAGE, CHRISTMAS, 1899.

'I wish you and all my brave soldiers a happy Christmas. God protect
and bless you all.--V.R.I.'


XX.

                              _Spearman's Camp, 29/1/00_ (6).

CAPTAIN C. A. HENSLEY DIED OF WOUNDS 21/1/00; STRUCK OFF STRENGTH;
ORDER REGRETTING HIS LOSS.

The following Officer and N.C.O. having been killed in action and died
of wounds on the dates opposite their names, are struck off the
strength of battalion accordingly:--

  Captain C. A. Hensley, died of wounds 21/1/00.
  No. 5668 Lance-Sergeant Taylor, D company, killed in action 20/1/00.

Whilst in common with all ranks deeply deploring the severe loss the
battalion has sustained by the death of Captain Hensley, the
Commanding Officer desires to place on record his great appreciation
of the services rendered on all occasions by the late Captain Hensley,
whose zeal, devotion to duty, and gallantry in action was ever
conspicuous since the present war began. He feels sure he is but
expressing the sentiments of all ranks in saying that his name will
always be handed down in honour to future generations of the regiment
as one of those who have nobly striven to shed additional lustre on
the regiment's reputation.


XXI.

                              _Spearman's Camp, 31/1/00_ (3)

PRESENT OF TOBACCO FROM PAST OFFICERS, AND LETTER, &C.

The following letter, accompanying a present of 400 pounds of tobacco
sent to the N.C.O.'s and men of the battalion by some former officers
of the battalion, has been received to-day:--

'From the old Officers of the 2nd Battalion Royal Dublin Fusiliers to
the N.C.O.'s, rank and file of the 2nd Royal Dublin Fusiliers, in
token of their high appreciation of the conspicuous gallantry
displayed by the battalion during the campaign, now in progress in
South Africa, in which they have so brilliantly maintained the ancient
traditions of the "Old Toughs."'

The following names are appended to the above:--Colonel R. Taylor,
Colonel Colville Frankland, Colonel C. E. Glasse, Colonel W. Holmes,
Colonel F. Taylor, Colonel W. C. Riddell, Lieut.-Colonel Reeves,
Lieut.-Colonel F. W. Graham, Lieut.-Colonel A. A. Godwin,
Lieut.-Colonel R. H. Mansel, Lieut.-Colonel M. J. Hickley,
Lieut.-Colonel J. R. Povah, Major the Hon. H. M. Hobart Hampden, Major
R. L. Shaw, Major S. J. Wynne, Major E. Pearse, Captain A. M.
Horrocks, Captain R. D. Vincent, Captain H. J. Guyon, Lieutenant W. S.
Burmester.

REPLY.

'Colonel Cooper, the Officers, N.C.O.'s and men of the 2nd Battalion
the Royal Dublin Fusiliers desire to return their very heartfelt
thanks to Colonel Frankland and the old Officers of the battalion for
their kind thoughtfulness in providing the men with tobacco.

'They beg to assure the old Officers that their gift is most
thoroughly appreciated, as also the expression of goodwill and
admiration of the battalion's services in the present campaign which
accompanies it.

'To know that the old Officers still continue to follow with interest
and admiration the fortunes and doings of the "Old Toughs" will ever
be an incentive to all ranks to do all that lies in their power to
maintain the reputation which the old Officers helped to win for the
corps in days gone by.'


XXII.

                              _Spearman's Camp, 1/2/00_ (5).

LANCE-SERGEANT MERRY PROMOTED FOR GALLANTRY.

The Commanding Officer has been pleased to specially promote the
undermentioned N.C.O. to the rank of Sergeant from January 12th for
meritorious service in the field:--

  No. 4441 Lance-Sergeant J. Merry, H company.


XXIII.

                              _Ladysmith, 5/3/00_ (2).

LOSSES IN ACTION, INCLUDING COLONEL SITWELL AND CAPTAIN MAITLAND,
NOTED AND DEPLORED.

The following Officers, N.C.O.'s and men having been killed in action
on the dates opposite their names, are struck off the strength of the
battalion, or cease to be attached to it as the case may be, from
those dates accordingly:--

  Major and Brevet-Lieut.-Colonel C. H. G. Sitwell, D.S.O., 24/2/00.
  Captain S. C. Maitland, 2nd Gordon Highlanders (attached), 24/2/00.

  No. 4871  Pte. J. White.
   "  4262  Cpl. J. Seymour.
   "  5359  Pte. Galbraith.
   "  2872   "   Wade.
   "  4012   "   J. Armstrong.
   "  2037   "   Whelan.
   "  3303   "   Timmins.
  No. 4743  Pte. T. Reid (attached). 24.2.00
   "  5073   "   Kinsella.
   "  6296   "   Allen.
   "  5618   "   T. Purcell.
   "  1717   "   Sherwin.
   "  2327   "   Grimes.
   "  1749  Sgt. T. Brennan.

Died of wounds 2/3/00:--

  No. 5745 Pte. Brady.

Whilst in common with the rest of the battalion deeply deploring the
loss of so many brave Officers, N.C.O.'s and men, and sympathising
with those who have been wounded, the Commanding Officer wishes to
place on record his high appreciation of the services rendered to the
battalion on all occasions by the late Major and Brevet-Lieut.-Colonel
Sitwell, whose distinguished career hitherto tended to the honour and
reputation of the regiment. All ranks of the battalion join with him,
he is sure, in lamenting the loss of such a distinguished soldier and
comrade, and a brilliant career thus suddenly though gloriously cut
short.

To the late Captain Maitland's sterling qualities as an officer and
comrade he would also wish to bear testimony. His services to the
battalion during a very trying and critical time were most valuable.
On behalf of the battalion he offers the late Captain Maitland's
relatives and brother-officers his deepest sympathy.


XXIV.

                              5/3/00 (4).

THE QUEEN'S MESSAGE RE RELIEF OF LADYSMITH.

The following telegram, received by the Commander-in-Chief on the
relief of Ladysmith from Her Most Gracious Majesty the Queen, is
published for information of all ranks:--

'Thank God for news you have telegraphed to me. Congratulate you with
all my heart.--V.R.I.'


XXV.

                              _Ladysmith, 5/3/00_ (3).

THE QUEEN'S MESSAGE--'MY BRAVE IRISH.'

The Commanding Officer has much pleasure in publishing for the
information of all ranks, the following message from Her Majesty the
Queen, to the 5th Brigade, which was recently received by the G.O.C.
in Chief in Natal.

_'To General Buller, Natal._

'I have heard with the deepest concern of the heavy losses sustained
by my brave Irish soldiers. I desire to express my admiration of the
splendid fighting qualities which they have exhibited throughout these
trying operations.--V.R.I.'

THE FOLLOWING REPLY WAS SENT BY SIR REDVERS BULLER:--

'Sir Redvers Buller has, on the part of the Irish Brigade, to thank
the Queen for her gracious telegram of sympathy and encouragement.'


XXVI.

                              5/3/00 (5).

LETTER TO GORDON HIGHLANDERS, RE CAPTAIN MAITLAND.

The Commanding Officer has, on behalf of the battalion, forwarded the
following letter to the Officer Commanding the 2nd Gordon Highlanders.

                              '_Ladysmith, 5/3/00._

'DEAR MAJOR SCOTT,--

'On behalf of myself and the officers of the battalion, I write to
offer you all our very deepest sympathy in the severe loss your
battalion has sustained by the death of Captain Maitland.

'I find it hard to adequately express to you how very deeply the whole
of my battalion laments his loss, and I know I am only expressing the
sentiments of all ranks when I assure you that his memory will ever be
cherished in the battalion.

'A better or more conscientious officer I have never had under my
command. We would all esteem it a very great favour if you could send
us a photograph of our late dear comrade, and might I also so far
trespass on your kindness, as to ask for one for his company (G) as
well, which I need hardly say will be highly prized by them.

  'Yours, &c.
                                   (Signed) C. D. COOPER.'


XXVII.

                                   _Ladysmith, 14/3/00_ (3).

NATAL ARMY ORDERS. THE WEARING OF SHAMROCK ON ST. PATRICK'S DAY.

The following extracts from Natal Army Orders are published for
information:--

'(1) The General Commanding has to communicate to the troops the
following telegram he has received from the C. in C. viz.

'Her Majesty the Queen is pleased to order that in future on St.
Patrick's Day all ranks in Her Majesty's Irish regiments shall wear as
a distinction a sprig of shamrock in their head-dress to commemorate
the gallantry of Her Irish soldiers during the recent battles in South
Africa.

                                   'WOLSELEY.'


XXVIII.

                              _Ladysmith, 18/3/00._

WINSTON CHURCHILL'S TELEGRAM TO REGIMENT.

The following telegrams received yesterday, and replies thereto, are
published for information:--

  '_To Colonel, Dublin Fusiliers, Ladysmith._

'My earnest congratulations on the honour the Dublin Fusiliers more
than any other regiment have won for the land of their birth. We are
all wearing the shamrock here.

  '(Signed)
                                   WINSTON CHURCHILL.'

REPLY.

'_To Winston Churchill, Lord Dundonald's Brigade._

'Many thanks for your kind message received yesterday, all ranks
appreciate your kind expressions.

  '(Signed)
                                   COLONEL, DUBLIN FUSILIERS.'


XXIX.

                              18/3/00 (1).

COLENSO RAILWAYMEN'S TELEGRAM TO REGIMENT.

'_To Brigadier-General Cooper, Commanding Irish Brigade, Ladysmith._

'On St. Patrick's Day the railway men of Colenso respectfully wish to
convey to the officers and men of Her Majesty's Dublin Fusiliers their
best wishes for a speedy termination of the present war, in which the
Dublins have borne so glorious a part. The whole of South Africa rings
with praise of the gallant Irish Brigade. We mourn with you the loss
of so many gallant men of your command. They have fallen in their
defence of a united South Africa, over which, please God, Her Most
Gracious Majesty's flag will fly from Cape Town to the Zambesi.

  '(Signed)
                                   INSPECTOR CAMPBELL.'

REPLY.

                              18/3/00 (1).

_'To Inspector Campbell, Colenso._

'On behalf of the officers and men under my command, please accept our
heartfelt thanks for your kind message and expressions of sympathy.

  (Signed)
                                   COLONEL COOPER.'


XXX.

                              _5th Brigade Orders, 18/3/00_ (1).

CAPE TOWN IRISHMEN SEND TELEGRAM.

The following telegram has been received by General Sir Redvers
Buller:--

'Cape Town Irishmen wish the gallant Irish officers and men under your
command many returns of St. Patrick's Day, and would express their
heartfelt admiration for the way in which they have maintained
unsullied the splendid military traditions of Ireland and the Empire
under your gallant leadership.'


XXXI.

                              _Ladysmith, 20/3/00_ (2).

THE QUEEN SENDS TELEGRAM OF THANKS.

The following reply to telegram sent by Colonel Cooper on behalf of
the battalion to Her Majesty the Queen on Shamrock Day was received
yesterday:--

'The Queen thanks her Dublin Fusiliers for loyal message. Windsor
Castle, 18th.'


XXXII.

                              _Elandslaagte, 3/4/00_ (7).

COLONEL SAUNDERSON'S LETTER.

The following letter was received to-day by the Commanding Officer
from Colonel Saunderson, M.P.:--

                           _'Castle Saunderson, Belturbet, 1/3/00._

'DEAR SIR,

'I cannot help writing to you to express on my part, and on the part
of every loyal Irishman, the pride and sympathy we take in the heroic
deeds of the Dublin Fusiliers in South Africa. Your gallant regiment
has shed a lustre on the army to which they belong and on the country
from which they come.

'No words of mine can express the admiration we feel for their
loyalty, their courage, and their indomitable determination. I hope
they realise how our hearts are with them.'

A reply thanking Colonel Saunderson has been sent by the Commanding
Officer.


XXXIII.

                              _Fourteen Streams, 12/5_ (3).

DEATH OF SECOND LIEUTENANT J. T. DENNIS AT ALIWAL NORTH, MAY 2ND.
ENTERIC.

The Commanding Officer deeply regrets to announce the death of Second
Lieutenant J. T. Dennis, which occurred at Aliwal North on May 2nd of
enteric.


XXXIV.

                              17/5/00 (4).

GENERAL HART CONGRATULATES 1ST BORDERS AND 2ND ROYAL DUBLIN FUSILIERS
ON THEIR MARCHING.

Major-General Hart congratulates the 1st Border Regiment and 2nd Royal
Dublin Fusiliers upon the recent instance of their marching powers.
For military reasons it was needful after the march forward yesterday
to march back at once to Fourteen Streams. As far as he can arrive at
a tolerably accurate estimate of the ground gone over, these two
battalions in the course of yesterday and last night marched
twenty-six miles in the space of nineteen hours. And the strong point
is that they arrived at the end of it in compact formation, still
going a good pace, and without any straggling or falling out. The
Major-General accordingly puts this event on record.


XXXV.

                              _Heidelberg, 2/7/00_ (5).

COLONEL COOPER'S FAREWELL ORDER.

The following farewell order by Major-General C. D. Cooper is
published for information. The Commanding Officer regrets that its
publication has been unavoidably postponed till now:--

'In bidding farewell to the battalion in which I have served for so
many years, I wish to thank all ranks from the bottom of my heart for
the kind and efficient support accorded to me during the period of my
command--close on five years. It was always my ambition to command the
battalion, and on active service, and I feel very thankful that my
wish was granted. We have fought together and worked hard for our
noble Queen and country, and all ranks have shown that good spirit and
bravery that has made the battalion what it is. You may rest assured
that I will always take the greatest interest in the doings of the
battalion, and I shall never forget the happy days spent amongst you.
I much regret that I was unable to wish you Godspeed in person, but I
sincerely hope I shall soon see you all again. My very sincere
sympathy and regret at our very heavy losses. May God bless you all.

  '(Signed)
                                     C. D. COOPER, _Major-General
  Commanding 4th Brigade_.'


XXXVI.

                              _Heidelberg, 24/7/00_ (6).

GENERAL BULLER'S TELEGRAM RE ZUIKERBOSCH.

The following telegram received by the G.O.C. is published for
information:--

'_from Sir Redvers Buller._

'So glad to hear of your fight. Good old Dublins, and tell them so
from me, and well done you.'


XXXVII.

                              _Krugersdorp, 4/10/00_ (8).

A PATROL UNDER LIEUTENANT GARVICE, &c.

A patrol under Lieutenant Garvice, Commanding Virginia Railway
Station, came in contact with some Boers on the 1st. We had one man
wounded, Boers three, whom they had to leave on the ground. The
casualties in the 2nd Coldstream Guards near Pan were caused by the
enemy's fire, the majority of the wounds were caused by explosive
bullets: the men behaved very well, and everybody kept their heads,
otherwise the loss would have been greater, as the Boers opened fire
at sixty yards range.


XXXVIII.

                              _Krugersdorp, 4/10/00_ (8).

COLONEL ROCHFORD'S ATTACK.

Colonel Rochford attacked a small Boer laager between Pretoria and
Johannesburg before dawn yesterday, with Royal Dublin Fusiliers and
M.I. Fusiliers. He rushed the position with the bayonet. Nine
prisoners were captured, most of them men of importance, who have been
troubling the district for some time. A small party of Boers made
their way to Dewetsdorp and Wepener. General Kelly Kenny has sent
troops to occupy both these places.


XXXIX.

                              _Krugersdorp, 16/12/00_ (8).

COMMANDING OFFICER'S REMARKS ON TREK.

The Commanding Officer is very well pleased with the way the men
marched in this trip, doing 102 miles in six days, an average of
seventeen miles a day; also with their excellent conduct and the
cheerful way in which all difficulties were met. The results of the
trip were over 1000 head of sheep and cattle and seven waggons
captured, thirty barns of forage burnt, and innumerable stocks of oat
hay, some of which concealed ammunition.


XL.

LETTER FROM GENERAL HART.

_Lieut.-Colonel Hicks, Commanding 2nd Battalion Royal Dublin
Fusiliers._

The manner in which the encampment of your battalion is arranged
deserves my special commendation. On very bad camping-ground, beset
with rocks and bush, and afflicted with dust between, I find your
companies excellently established by ingenious and industrious
adaptation to circumstances. The regularity and tidiness are
conspicuous, and have been noted by me with great satisfaction. I need
not say how much neatness of arrangements must conduce to quickness
and good quality of soldier work.

  (Signed)
                                   A. FITZROY HART,
                         _Major-General Commanding Irish Brigade_.

_Fourteen Streams, May 20th 1900._


XLI.

                              _Krugersdorp, 25/1/01_ (4).

GENERAL HART'S FAREWELL.

The following Farewell Order by Major-General A. Fitzroy Hart, C.B.,
is published for information:--

'In leaving to take another command, I wish you, my brother soldiers
of my force, farewell.

'It is an article of my faith, that you would go anywhere and do
anything required in battle.

'I leave you with deep regret, and of course I must feel this
particularly for the last of my old Irish brigade with which I began
the war.

'In departing, I give you this scrap of advice: Be individually,
whenever opportunity offers personally, not only kind but generous to
the inhabitants of this country which we have taken from them, and
among whom so many of our countrymen and countrywomen will have to
dwell. It will not diminish your soldierly strength, and it will
hasten a welcome for the pleasant government of peace.'


XLII.

                              _Fort Kilmarnock, 25/9/01_ (6).

LETTER FROM CAPTAIN ANLEY.

The following extracts from a letter received from Brevet-Major Anley,
Commanding 3rd M.I., are published for information:--

'The behaviour of your M.I. company continues to be very good.
Lieutenant Garvice and thirty men of the company did excellent service
the other day, when acting as rearguard to a convoy which was leaving
Carolina. It was reported that it was due to the steadiness of the men
of the Royal Dublin Fusiliers, and the able manner they were handled
by Lieutenant Garvice, that the convoy got in without loss.

'The Inspector-General M.I. wrote and asked me to congratulate
Lieutenant Garvice on the behaviour of his men. No. 4701, Private
Kelly, R.D.F., was recommended for gallantry on this occasion.

  '(Signed)
                                   F. GORE ANLEY,

_Brevet-Major Commanding 3rd Battalion M.I._'


XLIII.

CONSPICUOUS GALLANTRY AT GASKRAAL ON AUGUST 28TH, &C.

The following extract from Army Order No. 418, dated Pretoria,
September 28th, 1901, is published for information:--

'No. 1. The following have been brought to notice of the General
Officer Commanding-in-Chief, for gallantry and good service:

     2nd Royal Dublin Fusiliers: No. 6491, Lce.-Cpl. T. O'Connor
     (killed).

For great and conspicuous gallantry when very closely engaged with
enemy at Gaskraal on 28th Aug. 1901.'


XLIV.

LORD KITCHENER'S WIRE.

'I know I am speaking for the whole army in South Africa, when I wish
the Dublin Fusiliers Godspeed, and congratulate them on the fine
record they have established during their services in the country.'

ANSWER.

'I beg to thank your Lordship in the name of the regiment for your
very kind and congratulatory telegram, which is much appreciated by
all ranks.'


XLV.

ROLL OF OFFICERS, 2ND ROYAL DUBLIN FUSILIERS, WHO EMBARKED AT DURBAN
ON S.S. 'SICILIA,' ON THE 29/1/02, EN ROUTE FOR ADEN.

  Rank and Name.

  Col. H. T. Hicks, C.B.
  Maj. S. G. Bird, D.S.O.
  Capt. and Bt.-Maj. E. Fetherstonhaugh.
  Capt. and Bt.-Maj. M. Lowndes.
  Capt. H. W. Higginson.
   "    G. N. Cory, D.S.O.
  Lieut. C. Garvice, D.S.O.
   "     L. F. Renny.
   "     J. McD. Haskard.
   "     A. H. D. Britton.
  Lieut. A. de B. W. W. Bradford.
   "     S. G. De C. Wheeler.
  2nd Lieut. A. W. Newton.
   "         E. St. G. Smith
   "         R. F. B. Knox.
   "         J. P. Tredennick.
   "         B. Maclear.
   "         J. P. B. Robinson.
   "         E. F. E. Seymour.
   "         H. St. G. M. S. Scott.
  Lieut. J. Burke (Quartermaster).


_Printed by Strangeways & Sons, Tower Street,

Cambridge Circus, London, W.C._

